Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Metastatic breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer is also called advanced breast cancer. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest. The breast is made of milk ducts and lobules, fat, nerves, lymph and blood vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Behind the breast is the pectoral (chest) muscle and ribs. Muscle and ligaments help hold the breast in place. Breast tissue contains glands that can make milk. These milk glands are called lobules. Lobules look like tiny clusters of grapes. Small tubes called ducts connect the lobules to the nipple. The ring of darker breast skin is called the areola. The raised tip within the areola is called the nipple. The nipple-areola complex (NAC) is a term that refers to both parts. Lymph drains from breast tissue into lymph vessels and travels to lymph nodes near your armpit (axilla). Lymph is a clear fluid that gives cells water and food. It also helps to fight germs. Nodes near the armpit are called axillary lymph nodes (ALNs). The breast The breast is a glandular organ made up of milk ducts, fat, nerves, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma, most of which arise in cells that make up the lining (epithelial cells) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. How breast cancer spreads Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells differ from normal cells in the following ways. Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues. Invasive breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands (lobules) into the surrounding breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases. In this process, cancer cells break away from the first (primary) tumor and travel through blood or lymph vessels to distant sites. Once in other sites, cancer cells may form secondary tumors. Since cancer cells can spread through the blood, it is still possible to develop metastases even when the axillary lymph nodes are negative for cancer. Cancer that has spread to a nearby body part such as the axillary lymph nodes is called a local metastasis. It might be referred to as locoregional disease or locally advanced. Cancer that has spread to a body part far from the primary tumor is called a distant metastasis. Breast cancer can metastasize almost anywhere but most commonly spreads to the bone (including spine), lungs, liver, brain, or distant lymph nodes. Breast cancer that has metastasized to other parts of the body is still called breast cancer. More information on invasive breast cancer is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast and then spreads into surrounding tissue. Invasive breast cancer has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes. It is possible to have MBC when axillary lymph nodes do not have cancer. 省 Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 2 Testing for MBC Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor status HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic cancer risk testing Distress screening Performance status Key points Not all breast cancers are the same. Treatment planning starts with testing. Your care team will gather information about the cancer you have. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. The biopsy sample will be tested for estrogen and progesterone hormone receptors and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. This can be different people for different tasks or change over time. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible, or have someone on the phone or join you for telehealth visits. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about the specific type of cancer you have. Your test results and visit notes are likely available through a patient portal. Signing up for this portal can be one way to review those results and notes, too. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer, phone, or other electronic device. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer you have, as well as any treatments you've received and the date each treatment started. Set up a MyChart or health record account if it’s available, which can help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. Remember that in many places the MyChart or portal messages are not immediately seen by a nurse or physician, so urgent concerns are best called to the triage phone number. Ask your care team to learn more about how best to communicate with them. For possible tests, see Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask all family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer, or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing.
