About CLL 5 What is CLL? 6 What are the symptoms of CLL? 6 What causes CLL? 7 How is CLL treated? 7 Is there a cure for CLL? 7 What is SLL? 8 What can you do to get the best ca Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a type of blood cancer. It grows slowly. Treatment may not be needed for years. Some patients may never need treatment. However, for the majority of patients who do, newer treatments can help extend life. What is CLL? CLL stands for: Chronic – a condition that doesn’t go away Lymphocytic – occurs in the lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell Leukemia – cancer that occurs in blood cells Put together, chronic lymphocytic leukemia is a condition in your lymphocytes that doesn’t go away. It’s considered a form of cancer. Your blood contains several types of blood cells. One of those is white blood cells. B cells, also called B lymphocytes, are one type of white blood cell. They’re made within the soft, spongy tissue inside most of your bones called bone marrow. When they've matured properly, B cells leave your bone marrow to work in your bloodstream. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. In people with CLL, abnormal B cells grow out of control, crowding out healthy B cells. This oversupply of abnormal B cells prevents healthy B cells from performing their duties effectively. This results in fewer healthy blood cells and a higher risk of infection. What are the symptoms of CLL? Usually, CLL doesn’t cause symptoms at first. It may be found due to routine blood testing. Symptoms of CLL may include the following. See a health care professional as soon as you can if you have any of these symptoms: Swollen glands in your neck, or you feel swelling in your stomach Feel tired more easily or fatigue Excessive sweating or night sweats Fever Infections that keep coming back despite treatment Loss of appetite or becoming full too quickly (early satiety) Unintentional weight loss What causes CLL? The specific cause of CLL isn't currently known other than that there is a change within the bone marrow. It can be tied to several factors: Older adults tend to develop changes or mutations that could cause cancer like CLL to form over time Blood relatives of someone with CLL can have a higher chance of getting CLL themselves Lymph system Many B cells are in the lymph (or lymphatic) system. This system plays a key role in fighting infections. The tonsils, thymus, spleen, and lymph vessels and nodes are parts of the lymph system (shown). There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the body, and many are in the neck, armpits, and groin. How is CLL treated? Treatment of CLL depends on your body. You may not need treatment right away. But treatment may be needed if your white blood cell count is rising rapidly, if you have low numbers of other normal blood cells (anemia, low platelets, or low neutrophils), if you have large or uncomfortable lymph nodes, or if you have symptoms listed above. Many treatment options are available and should be discussed with your doctor at your first visit and as your condition is followed. These range from pills you take every day to a combination of IV infusions and pills taken for a specific amount of time. You may live for years without needing treatment. If or when someone needs treatment can vary greatly from person to person. You may have a more intense or aggressive treatment plan if you develop Richter transformation, which is described later. This rare condition can lead to a more aggressive cancer called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) or another cancer called Hodgkin lymphoma. Is there a cure for CLL? There is currently no cure for CLL, but you can get effective treatment so your blood cells will be mostly healthy ones and a full life is possible. This is a condition called minimal residual disease. We’ll describe this in a later chapter. While the goal of treatment is not to cure CLL, the goal is to prevent the disease from causing problems and from becoming life-threatening. What is SLL? Small lymphocytic lymphoma, or SLL, is the same cancer as CLL. The only difference between the two is where the abnormal cells are found. CLL is mostly found in the blood and bone marrow. SLL is mostly found in lymph nodes and the spleen. If a person has fewer than 5,000 cancerous cells in their blood, it is considered SLL. Anything more than that is considered CLL. The lymph nodes and spleen play a key role in fighting infections. CLL can also be found in the lymph nodes. Lymph nodes and the spleen may be swollen because of a buildup of CLL or SLL cells. Treatment of CLL and SLL is the same because the cancer cells are the same. For this book, treat any recommendation for CLL as one for SLL. For this reason, the disease is often referred to as CLL/SLL. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied and less anxious when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! What's in this book? This patient guide describes everything you need to know about living with CLL, including: Tests needed to determine the best treatment for you A period of monitoring, known as "watch and wait" Treatments available for CLL Caring for a rare complication called Richter transformation Supportive care to improve your quality of life 2 Testing for CLL How is CLL confirmed? How is treatment planned? What if I’m pregnant? What’s a prognosis? What’s next? Key points Questions to ask You’ll need specific tests to confirm you have chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). If CLL is found, you’ll need more tests to decide when to start treatment, which treatment will work best, and what supportive care you’ll need. How is CLL confirmed? Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is confirmed with a blood test. Diagnosis by blood tests You’ll have a blood test where you’ll provide a small sample of your blood, which will be sent to a lab for testing. A specialist called a hematopathologist is an expert at diagnosing cancers of blood and immune cells. They look at blood, bone Immunophenotype Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) often has a common pattern of surface proteins on its cells. An example of these proteins is CD20 (shown). It helps identify the correct type of cancer. For instance, CLL cells have proteins called CD200 and LEF1, but another type of lymphoma, called mantle cell lymphoma, does not have them. Derivative work of NIAID - Rituxima Binding to CD20 on a B Cell Surface, CC BY 0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=39933221 marrow, and lymph node samples for signs of disease. The hematopathologist and your oncologist will examine a drop of your blood using a microscope. This is called a blood smear. The way the abnormal cells look can be a clue as to what type of cancer you have. Your blood will also be tested using a method called flow cytometry. It can detect common patterns of proteins on the outside of cells. Most cells have an identifiable pattern of proteins, like a silhouette or a shape, called the immunophenotype. A CLL diagnosis requires at least 5,000 or more of the same white blood cells called monoclonal B lymphocytes to be found per microliter in your blood. Diagnosis by biopsy A biopsy is a procedure that removes samples from the body for testing. If the blood results aren’t clear, you’ll have a biopsy of your lymph nodes or bone marrow to confirm CLL. Tests of lymph nodes will also confirm small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL). An excisional biopsy is when a whole lymph node is removed by a surgeon, while an incisional biopsy removes only part of a lymph node. There are many lymph nodes throughout your body, so if you have a lymph node removed, you won’t lose your ability to fight infections and disease. Needle biopsies take a small sample of a lymph node using a needle. They can be done when other biopsies are not safe to perform. A lab test will be used to find the immunophenotype of the biopsied cells. A bone marrow biopsy removes a core sample of marrow. A bone marrow aspiration removes liquid and cells from the marrow. These procedures are usually done at the same time. They’re performed on the back of the hip bone. You may receive an injected pain blocker or light sedative to help you relax. Tests of bone marrow aren’t usually needed for diagnosis, so you might not get one. How is treatment planned? Lab results used for diagnosis are included in a report. This report will be sent to your hematologist-oncologist, an expert in blood cancers. You may be able to view the pathology report using an online patient portal, or you could ask for a copy. The report is used to plan your treatment. Your oncologist will review the results with you. Take notes and ask questions. What tests are needed for starting treatment? The tests used to provide care are listed in Guide 1 and are described next. Health history Expect your care team to review your health in detail. This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL. These symptoms are called B symptoms and include: Fevers when you’re not sick Night sweats that drench your sheets Weight loss you didn’t expect Some cancers and other health problems can run in families. Be prepared to discuss the health of your close blood relatives, like your siblings, parents, and grandparents. These are your first- and second-degree relatives, as seen in the figure below. Relatives are 7 to 8 times more likely to develop CLL if there’s a family history. Physical exam Your hematologist/oncologist will perform a physical exam of your body. This exam will include: Checking your vital signs—blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature—and assessing your overall appearance Feeling and listening to organs Assessing your level of pain, if any, when you are touched Checking for swelling Cancer cells can build up in lymph nodes, the spleen, and the liver causing them to swell. Your oncologist will look at and gently press on your body to assess their size. Areas that may be touched include your neck, armpit, belly, and groin. Performance status Performance status is your ability to do daily activities, like feeding yourself or bathing. Your oncologist will score your performance status based on your health history and exam. Blood tests Blood tests can measure blood cells, proteins, and chemicals in the bloodstream. If you haven’t had a blood test recently, you’ll get a complete blood count (CBC) with differential. A CBC measures parts of the blood including counts of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. h A differential counts the most common types of white blood cells in your blood. It also checks if the cell counts are in balance with each other. White blood cell counts are often high at diagnosis of CLL. Other blood counts, such as red blood cells or platelets, may be low. A comprehensive metabolic panel is a screening test for many diseases. It often includes tests for up to 14 chemicals in the blood. Abnormal levels may mean your kidneys and liver are not working as they should. Beta-2 microglobulin is a small protein found on most cells. It is released by cells into the blood by B cells. High levels of beta-2 microglobulin may suggest CLL is growing. Bone marrow tests Bone marrow tests are not often needed to diagnose CLL. However, they may be done to find out what’s causing low blood cell counts. Biomarker tests CLL cells have unique features that can be used to plan treatment specifically for you. These features are called biomarkers. Biomarkers are found with lab tests using either a blood or bone marrow sample: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can show missing parts and extra copies of genetic material called chromosomes. It can detect a biomarker called 17p deletion. DNA sequencing is used to look for mutations in the TP53 and IGHV genes, which control how your cells die when they’re not healthy. A karyotype can show defects in chromosomes. A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL. Diagnostic CT Computed tomography, or CT, is like an x-ray but it shows body tissue more clearly. A diagnostic CT uses more radiation than regular CT and adds a contrast agent. Some people refer to this as a CAT scan. A contrast agent is a chemical that highlights body tissues for the scanner. It’s given to you through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Some people can’t have contrast due to certain health issues, like allergies or chronic kidney disease. Ask if contrast is safe for you. A diagnostic CT of your chest, abdomen, and pelvis may be needed for 2 reasons: To look for big lymph nodes that may be causing symptoms To assess the extent of the cancer before starting treatment Since a CT scan is often not needed, you should ask your doctor what the reason is to obtain the test. A CT scan is done in the radiology department, in a big machine that looks like a tunnel. The scan won’t hurt, but if you need contrast you will need to get a needle placed in your arm. A radiologist will review your scans and send the results to your oncologist. 66 I am so grateful I had a consultation with a CLL specialist. It was reassuring to finally speak to a CLL specialist. The doctor answered all my questions thoroughly. I am very satisfied with the advice I received." What if I’m pregnant? Some cancer treatments can harm an unborn baby. If you have the potential to become pregnant, your cancer care team will give you a pregnancy test before treatment. Your treatment options will depend on the results. Preserving fertility Many people have healthy babies despite cancer and its treatment. If you wish to have kids, there are important steps to take before treatment. Even if you are unsure, talk to your cancer care team. Fertility is the ability to have a baby. Some cancer treatments can damage the body parts needed for fertility. Ask your care team if you’re at risk for impaired fertility. It can happen to people of any gender. You may receive a referral to a fertility specialist. A fertility specialist is an expert in helping people have babies. They can explain how you may be able to have a baby during or after treatment. Collecting and freezing sperm or eggs is a common method. More information on fertility preservation can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cancer treatment can impact one's ability to have children. Before starting treatment, talk with a fertility counselor to learn what your options are for fertility preservation. What’s a prognosis? Prognosis is the likely course and outcome of a disease based on tests. Prognosis is used to predict how the cancer will turn out. Some people with CLL want to know the prognosis, but others don’t. Tell your care team what information you do and do not want to know. Some people with CLL have certain biomarkers that can be targets for chemoimmunotherapy. More research is needed to know how they predict the results of targeted therapy. See Guide Beta-2 microglobulin is also a biomarker used to determine how hard cancer will be to treat. High levels may suggest that CLL will likely be harder to treat. What’s next? What happens next depends on what your tests find. You may move on to a stage called “watch and wait”. This means you won’t start any treatment aside from those that make you feel better if you’re sick. We’ll talk about this it more in Chapter 3: Watch and wait. You could move on to treatment right away if your care team feels you need to. We’ll tell you all about what treatments you could use in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL. There’s a condition called Richter transformation that we describe in Chapter 5: Richter transformation. If your care team tells you that you have this, we advise you to read that chapter.
