About thyroid cancer 5 The thyroid 6 Who is at risk? 7 Key points There are different types of thyroid cancer. Most are curable with the right treatment. When possible, surgery is recommended for most thyroid cancers. The thyroid The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the front of the neck. It has 2 lobes, a right and a left. A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms. They are often found by imaging tests done for a different reason. Symptoms of a larger nodule could include: A visible lump in the neck Neck pain Voice changes Trouble breathing Problems swallowing Who is at risk? Those assigned female at birth are 3 times more likely to be diagnosed with a thyroid cancer compared to those assigned male at birth. Compared to other cancers, thyroid cancer is often diagnosed earlier in adulthood. It is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. For more information on cancer in this group, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Anything that increases the chances of developing a disease is called a risk factor. The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors. Radiation exposure Anyone who has had radiation treatment to the head or neck in the past (to treat a childhood cancer, for example) is at increased risk of thyroid cancer. Contact with large amounts of radiation in the environment as a result of a catastrophic event also increases the risk of developing a thyroid cancer. Family history Most thyroid cancers are sporadic, meaning there is no clear cause or risk factor. Only a small number are hereditary, or the result of inherited gene mutations (changes). A personal or family history of thyroid cancer or a related syndrome may increase the risk of thyroid cancer. Syndromes related to thyroid cancer include familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), Carney complex, Cowden syndrome, and multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN). Cowden syndrome is also known as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS). This inherited syndrome can cause follicular thyroid cancer, and other cancers and health problems. Tell your provider if you have a personal or family history of breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer. Key points The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck. It makes hormones that help regulate metabolism and other body functions. Thyroid cancers start as small, often round areas of abnormal growth called nodules. Most don’t cause symptoms and are benign. Thyroid cancer is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. The most well-known risk factors are radiation exposure and a family history of thyroid cancer. 2 Testing 9 TSH test 9 Ultrasound 10 Biopsy 11 Key points If a thyroid nodule is found or suspected, a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) blood test and an ultrasound of the thyroid and neck are needed. Your doctor uses the results to decide whether a biopsy is needed. TSH test Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) is a hormone made by the pituitary gland, located near the base of the brain. TSH controls the hormones made by the thyroid. A TSH blood test can't diagnose thyroid cancer. The level is checked to learn if the nodule is producing thyroid hormone. Nodules that make thyroid hormone are rarely cancerous. A high TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are low. A low TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are high. This is called hyperthyroidism or overactive thyroid. Your provider may order a radioactive iodine (RAI) uptake test. Ultrasound Ultrasound is the most common imaging technique used to look for thyroid cancer. It uses sound waves to form images showing the size, shape, and location of a thyroid nodule. An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is brief and painless. It is usually done lying down. A Ultrasound An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is one of the first tests ordered if a thyroid nodule is known or suspected. hand-held device called an ultrasound probe is used. After a gel is applied to the skin, the probe is moved back and forth over the thyroid area. If ultrasound finds any suspicious lymph nodes in the neck, further imaging with CT or MRI is recommended. A substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. Biopsy A biopsy removes samples of fluid or tissue from the body to be tested. Your doctor will consider the nodule size and other features as seen on the ultrasound to determine if a biopsy is needed. Some nodules don't need to be biopsied and are monitored with ultrasound. If a biopsy is needed, fine-needle aspiration (also called needle biopsy or FNA) is recommended. This method uses a thin needle to take small samples of suspicious thyroid nodules. Ultrasound is usually done at the same time to help pinpoint the suspicious areas. Pathology review The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist. Pathologists are physicians with expertise in examining tissues and cells to diagnose disease. By examining the sample under a microscope, the pathologist is able to determine whether the nodule is cancerous, and if so, the cancer type. In certain types of lesions, such as follicular and oncocytic tumors, fine-needle biopsy can identify the nature of the cells, but can't determine if the nodule is cancerous. For these lesions, surgery is often needed to make a final diagnosis. Now, molecular tests are available that can help determine whether the nodule is cancerous and whether surgery is necessary. Papillary carcinoma is the most common type of thyroid cancer, followed by follicular carcinoma, then oncocytic. Papillary, follicular, and oncocytic carcinomas are known as the differentiated thyroid cancers. Differentiated cancers usually grow and spread slowly. Treatment of these types is addressed in Chapter Medullary thyroid cancer is the third most common type of thyroid cancer. This type can be inherited, meaning it can run in families. Medullary thyroid cancer is the focus of Chapter Anaplastic thyroid cancer is the most aggressive type of thyroid cancer. It is rare and most often affects older adults. This type is the focus of Chapter The type and other features of biopsied lesions are recorded in a pathology report. Ask for a copy of the report to have for your records. Your care team uses it to plan the next steps of care. Key points Although most nodules aren't cancerous, a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) test and ultrasound are recommended if a thyroid nodule is known or suspected. Your provider uses the ultrasound results to determine whether a needle biopsy is needed. Biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist. The pathologist determines whether the nodule is cancerous and, if so, the cancer type. 3 Treatments 13 15 16 18 19 21 Surgery Radioactive iodine Radiation therapy Systemic therapy Clinical trials Key points Surgery is the most common treatment for most thyroid cancers. However, active surveillance may be an option for some very-low-risk cancers. This involves closely monitoring the cancer instead of performing surgery right away. Surgery Surgery is the most effective treatment for thyroid cancer. Surgery may involve removing the entire thyroid gland, or just the half that contains cancer. Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the cancerous lobe. Lobectomy may be an option for some small and low-risk differentiated thyroid cancers. Total thyroidectomy A total thyroidectomy removes the entire thyroid gland. Lymph nodes near the thyroid are also removed if they are known or suspected to have cancer. This is called a neck dissection. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the gland. Most people stay in the hospital overnight after surgery. After being discharged, it is important to follow the instructions for at-home care. Contact your care team about any new or worsening side effects. Long-term side effects of removing the thyroid can include: Low levels of calcium in the blood (hypoparathyroidism) Damage to the nerves that control your voice and swallowing Thyroid hormone replacement therapy After a total thyroidectomy, medicine is used to replace the hormones no longer being supplied by the thyroid. This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy. It is needed lifelong in all people after total thyroidectomy. After a lobectomy, about 1 in 3 people need thyroid hormone therapy. Levothyroxine (eg, Levoxyl; Synthroid) is the most commonly used thyroid hormone replacement therapy. The goal for most people is to keep the level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the low normal range. For higher risk thyroid cancers, or if there are signs of recurrence, the TSH level is kept lower than the normal range (suppressed). This helps prevent thyroid cancer cells from growing or returning. Suppression is an important part of cancer therapy for most differentiated thyroid cancers. Levothyroxine is taken as a pill once a day. It must be taken on an empty stomach, at least 30 mintutes prior to eating a meal. If not, it won't be adequately absorbed into the blood. Finding the right dose can take some trial and error. If the dose isn't optimal, common side effects include: Anxiety Trouble sleeping Racing heart (with or without an abnormal heartbeat) Sweating Blood tests are used to check the TSH level on a regular basis during thyroid replacement therapy. Your doctor can find the right dose of thyroid hormone for you by checking the TSH level and adjusting the dose as needed. Too much levothyroxine can cause health problems, including: Weakened bones Heart rhythm problems Having too much thyroid hormone (thyrotoxicosis) Calcium and vitamin D Your provider may recommend taking calcium and vitamin D supplements to help strengthen your bones. Treatment team Treating thyroid cancer takes a team of experts. Your care team may include an endocrinologist, radiologist, nuclear medicine specialist, surgeon, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist. You and your team will decide on a treatment plan that is best for you. This written course of action covers every phase of the treatment process. Radioactive iodine Radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy uses a form of radioactive iodine (iodine-131) to selectively kill thyroid cancer cells that take up (“eat”) iodine. The goal is to target only the thyroid cells in the neck (both cancer cells and any remaining normal thyroid cells) and elsewhere in the body while sparing healthy cells and tissues. RAI therapy may be used in the following situations: To lower the chances that a high-risk cancer returns after treatment To treat thyroid cancer that has spread within the body Shortly after thyroidectomy for some lower-risk cancers, using lower-dose iodine-131 (also known as remnant ablation) RAI therapy is used after total thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancers that take up iodine. It is generally only recommended for cancers at higher risk of coming back. RAI isn’t effective against medullary or anaplastic thyroid cancer. How is it given? RAI therapy comes in liquid or pill form and is taken by mouth. You may be asked to eat a diet low in iodine for 1 to 2 weeks before starting this treatment. You need a high level of TSH for RAI therapy. Thyroid hormone replacement may be stopped for a few weeks beforehand. If this isn’t recommended for you, hormone injections of thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen) can be used to increase the TSH level. Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging. Possible side effects of RAI therapy include: Neck pain or swelling in glands near the jaw Nausea and vomiting Dry mouth or eyes Watery eyes Change in taste or smell The dose of RAI therapy is often adjusted for children with thyroid cancer and people on dialysis for kidney disease. If any cancer can be removed by surgery, this will be considered before starting RAI therapy. Safety measures The radiation will exit your body through urine and other body fluids. This means that your body will give off small amounts of radiation after treatment. For a short time, you will need to take safety measures around others, especially children and pregnant people. Whole-body RAI scan After RAI, a whole-body radioiodine scan is performed to look for remaining thyroid tissue and “hidden” areas of thyroid cancer in the body. At some treatment centers, a wholebody scan is also done before RAI therapy. This imaging can be done using small doses of iodine-131 or a similar form of radioactive iodine called iodine- Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy small areas of cancer. To treat thyroid cancer, radiation is given using a large machine outside the body. This is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation therapy is rarely used for papillary and follicular cancers. Anaplastic thyroid cancer, in contrast, is almost always treated with radiation therapy. Radiation therapy may be used for thyroid cancer that can't be removed with surgery and doesn't respond to RAI therapy. Radiation therapy can also relieve symptoms caused by cancer spread, such as difficulty or pain swallowing, loss of your voice, or pain or stiffness in your neck. It may also be helpful if the cancer has spread to another organ, such as the bones or brain, to stop the cancer from growing in that specific area. You will first have a planning session called a simulation. You will be placed in the treatment position and a CT scan or other type of scan will be done. The images will be used to make a radiation plan tailored to your body and cancer. During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room, but will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. You won't feel anything while the radiation is being delivered. One treatment session can take 30 to 60 Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, gamma rays, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. It is also used to treat pain caused by the cancer. minutes. It's common to have 5 sessions per week. Common side effects of radiation to the neck area include: Skin rash or redness Problems swallowing Dry mouth h Thick saliva Changes in taste Tiredness While most side effects of radiation therapy start during treatment and stop shortly after it is over, some can occur years later. If your doctor recommends external radiation, they will discuss what to expect from treatment, including possible short- and long-term side effects. Fertility and family planning If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will discuss any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about your fertility preservation options. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with substances that travel in the bloodstream, reaching and affecting cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy are types of systemic therapy. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies can target and attack specific types of cancer cells. They are generally only used for thyroid cancers that: Can't be treated with surgery or RAI therapy Have returned after treatment Have spread to areas far from the neck (metastasized) and are continuing to grow The targeted therapies currently used for thyroid cancer are called kinase inhibitors. Most are capsules that you swallow. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy doesn't work well against most thyroid cancers. It may be used for cancer that isn't responding to other treatment, or that has spread to distant areas of the body. It is most often used in combination with radiation therapy for anaplastic thyroid cancer—the least common and most aggressive type. Most chemotherapy medicines are put directly into the bloodstream through a vein. Systemic therapy side effects Side effects of systemic therapy can include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Diarrhea Constipation Hair loss Mouth sores Loss of appetite Low blood cell counts (white cells, red cells, and platelets) Side effects seen more often with targeted therapy include body aches, rash, high blood pressure, and abnormal bleeding. Some targeted therapies have serious side effects that can affect your heart, skin, and digestive system. If systemic therapy is planned, ask your care team for a complete list of potential side effects. Most side effects only occur during cancer treatment. But, some can start years later. For example, long-term side effects of chemotherapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and not being able to have children. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. FDA. Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the safety and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. Phase 2 trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase 3 trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA. Phase 4 trials study the long-term safety and benefit of an FDA-approved treatment. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health. These requirements ensure that participants are alike in specific ways and that the trial is as safe as possible for the participants. Informed consent Clinical trials are managed by a group of experts called a research team. The research team will review the study with you in detail, including its purpose and the risks and benefits of joining. All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your doctor to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all of your treatment options. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many people with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment, or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or childcare due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance. You are responsible for copays and any costs for this care that are not covered by your insurance. Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact Key points h Your treatment team may include an endocrinologist, radiologist, nuclear medicine doctor, surgeon, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist. Surgery is the main treatment for thyroid cancer. Active surveillance may be an option for very-low-risk cancers. RAI therapy may be used after total thyroidectomy to kill any remaining cancer cells. Thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine is needed lifelong after total thyroidectomy. About 1 in 3 people need hormone replacement after a lobectomy. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is used for more aggressive (anaplastic), recurrent, or metastatic cancers that can’t be removed surgically. Targeted therapy may be an option for thyroid cancers that don’t respond to other treatments, or that have metastasized and are continuing to grow. Clinical trials provide access to investigational treatments that may, in time, be approved by the U.S. FDA. 4 Papillary, follicular, and oncocytic carcinoma Papillary thyroid cancer Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Radioactive iodine therapy Monitoring and follow-up care Recurrence Metastatic cancer Key points Papillary, follicular, and oncocytic carcinoma are known as differentiated thyroid cancers. These cancers usually grow slowly and have good treatment outcomes. Differentiated thyroid cancers are treated with surgery to remove all or part of the thyroid. For many years, total thyroidectomy was the standard treatment for all thyroid cancers. Today, it remains a treatment option for everyone with thyroid cancer. However, newer research shows that lobectomy may be just as effective for treating small, low-risk cancers that haven't grown or spread beyond the thyroid. A potential benefit of lobectomy is that thyroid hormone replacement therapy may not be needed. Or, a lower dose may be needed. Papillary thyroid cancer Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the most common of all the thyroid cancers. The most common subtype is “classic type.” Other subtypes that may grow and spread more quickly include: Follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer Tall-cell/columnar cell Hobnail Diffuse sclerosing Is surgery always needed? Some small papillary tumors (no bigger than a pea) may be safely monitored without surgery. This approach is known as active surveillance. The size of the cancer is monitored using ultrasound. For active surveillance to be an option, there also can't be any nearby lymph nodes suspicious for cancer, and the tumor can't be in a high-risk location (such as the back of the thyroid, butting up against the trachea). Thyroidectomy or lobectomy? If surgery is needed, either a total thyroidectomy or lobectomy is performed. Some papillary cancers should always be treated with total thyroidectomy. A total thyroidectomy is recommended for papillary cancers that have grown or spread beyond the thyroid—whether into the neck, to nearby lymph nodes, or to distant areas. Tumors larger than 4 centimeters (cm) (about the size of a walnut) and high-risk types of papillary cancer should also be treated with total thyroidectomy. Lymph nodes near the thyroid that are known to have cancer are also removed during surgery. There are other reasons your doctor may recommend a total thyroidectomy. Factors such as whether the neck area was ever treated with radiation therapy will be considered. If the cancer is small and noninvasive, lobectomy may be a treatment option in addition to thyroidectomy. Treatment with lobectomy is preferred if the following criteria are met: You’ve never had radiation therapy The cancer hasn’t spread at all beyond the thyroid. The tumor is 1 to 4 cm in size. The extent of the cancer can't be fully known until the surgeon sees the thyroid, tumor, and surrounding areas first-hand, as well as the results of the pathologic exam of the removed tissues. If the cancer is larger or more invasive than expected during a lobectomy, the decision is usually made during surgery to remove the entire thyroid. After total thyroidectomy If the results of surgery are very good, radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy is sometimes used to kill cancer cells left in the body. If a concerning amount of cancer remains after surgery, treatment options may include: Another surgery RAI therapy Radiation therapy Systemic therapy Monitoring After treatment with 1 or more of the above, thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine is started. This keeps the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level low or normal. After lobectomy After a lobectomy, everything that was removed or sampled (biopsied) during surgery is examined and tested. If examination of the tumor, other tissue, or lymph nodes by a pathologist finds certain concerning or highrisk features, another surgery to remove the rest of the thyroid (completion thyroidectomy) is recommended. If the results of surgery and pathologic examination are very good and no highrisk features are found, more surgery isn’t usually needed. Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone. Fineneedle aspiration (FNA) can only suggest these types. In order to be diagnosed as follicular or oncocytic cancer, the cancer must have grown into veins or arteries in and around the thyroid, or into the outer layer of the tumor. This can be learned by pathologic examination of the removed thyroid, or in some cases with genetic testing of the biopsy sample. Total thyroidectomy or lobectomy? A total thyroidectomy is recommended for a suspected follicular or oncocytic tumor that has grown beyond the thyroid. The surgeon will also remove any nearby lymph nodes known to have cancer. Your provider may also recommend total thyroidectomy if the tumor is larger than 4 cm. If the cancer hasn't spread beyond the thyroid, lobectomy may be a treatment option in addition to thyroidectomy. The extent of the cancer can't be fully known until the surgeon sees the thyroid, tumor, and surrounding areas first-hand, as well as the results of the pathologic examination of the removed tissues. If the cancer is more invasive than expected during a lobectomy, the decision is usually made during surgery to remove the entire thyroid. After total thyroidectomy After surgery, everything that was removed or sampled (biopsied) is examined by a pathologist. Pathologic examination may find that the tumor is benign (not cancer). In this case, no more cancer treatment is needed. Lifelong thyroid hormone replacement therapy is needed, however. If pathologic examination confirms follicular or oncocytic thyroid cancer, further treatment depends on the results of surgery. RAI therapy may be used to kill cancer cells left in the body. See the next page for more information. If a concerning amount of cancer remains after surgery, there is more than one possibility. Options may include: Another surgery (preferred, if possible) RAI therapy Radiation therapy Systemic therapy Monitoring After treatment with one or more of the above, hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine is started. Hormone replacement therapy keeps the TSH level low or normal. After lobectomy Depending on the extent of cancer observed during surgery and the results of pathologic examination, you may have more surgery to remove the rest of the thyroid. If the cancer is invasive, removing the rest of the thyroid is recommended. For less invasive or minimally invasive cancer, surgery to remove the rest of the thyroid is one option. An alternative is to take a watch-and-wait approach and monitor the cancer. If this option is planned, you may receive levothyroxine to keep your TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-bycase basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. If the nodule removed during lobectomy is benign, monitoring is recommended. In some cases, you may receive levothyroxine to keep your TSH level normal. Radioactive iodine therapy If all or most of the cancer was removed during total thyroidectomy, RAI therapy may be an option to kill thyroid cancer cells left in the body. Your provider will consider the following factors to help decide if RAI may be helpful: The size of the tumor The tumor subtype Whether the cancer invaded lymph or blood vessels Whether the cancer has spread to lymph nodes The thyroglobulin (Tg) level after surgery Age at diagnosis RAI therapy is usually recommended if any of the following is true: The cancer had spread significantly beyond the thyroid The cancer had invaded blood vessels (applies to follicular and oncocytic tumors) The Tg level was high 6 to 12 weeks after surgery There were large, or more than 5, lymph nodes with cancer The tumor is a differentiated high-grade carcinoma Monitoring and follow-up care Follow-up testing and surveillance are somewhat different after lobectomy versus after total thyroidectomy. After total thyroidectomy Short-term follow-up after total thyroidectomy involves a physical exam and blood tests. A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page. If you had RAI therapy after total thyroidectomy, you may have whole-body RAI imaging to look for cancer after treatment. It may be helpful for high-risk patients, those with metastases that took up iodine, or those with abnormal blood or ultrasound results. Blood tests Blood testing will measure the levels of the following: Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroglobulin (Tg) h Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (Tg ab) Thyroglobulin (Tg) is only made by thyroid tissue. If the thyroid is removed, there shouldn’t be any Tg in the blood. Therefore, checking the Tg level can serve as a way to monitor for the return of cancer. If the Tg level rises, it could be a sign that further testing is needed to check for recurrence. A small number of people with thyroid cancer make antibodies in response to Tg. These antiTg antibodies in blood can interfere with the Tg level. If the anti-Tg antibody level goes down, it may be a sign that treatment is working. If Neck ultrasound Neck ultrasound is used to monitor for the return of thyroid cancer. Talk to your care team about how often you need to have ultrasounds. it goes up, further testing should be done to check for cancer recurrence. Long-term monitoring If follow-up test results are normal, it is considered no evidence of disease (NED). In those with NED, longer-term surveillance includes physical exams, blood tests (TSH, Tg, and Tg ab), and periodic neck ultrasound. If there is reason to suspect the cancer has returned, you may have additional lab work, additional neck ultrasounds, TSH-stimulated testing (testing while thyroid hormone is stopped), or imaging procedures such as CT or MRI. After lobectomy Short-term follow-up after lobectomy involves a physical exam and TSH blood test. A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. Unlike after total thyroidectomy, Tg testing isn’t helpful after lobectomy. If there is no evidence of disease, longer-term surveillance includes physical exams, TSH blood tests, and neck ultrasound. Talk to your care team about how often you need to have ultrasounds. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. See Chapter 7: Survivorship for more information. Recurrence Although the thyroid has been removed, cancer can return to the neck or to areas far from the neck. The return of cancer after treatment is called recurrence. Biomarker testing Biomarkers are targetable features of a cancer. Many are mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. For thyroid cancers with 1 or more specific biomarkers, targeted therapy or immunotherapy may be a treatment option if needed. Biomarker testing involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. Testing for the following biomarkers is recommended for recurrent, advanced, or metastatic cancers that can't be treated with RAI therapy: h ALK gene fusion NTRK gene fusion BRAF gene mutations RET gene fusion (found in some medullary thyroid cancers) Mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) Microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) Tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H) Your provider may test for these individually or as part of a group. Testing for many biomarkers at one time is called nextgeneration sequencing (NGS). Cancer that returns to the neck If the cancer can be removed based on its size and location, surgery is the preferred treatment. For cancers that take up iodine, treatment with RAI therapy will also be considered. But, treatment isn't always needed. If the cancer isn't getting worse and isn't close to any critical structures, your provider may recommend close monitoring instead of treatment. If the cancer can't be removed with surgery, doesn’t take up iodine, and is getting worse (progressing), treatment with radiation therapy, targeted therapy, or both may be an option. The preferred targeted therapy for cancer that can’t be removed with surgery and is progressing is lenvatinib (Lenvima). Another recommended option is sorafenib (Nexavar). If the cancer gets worse after treatment with 1 or both of these, cabozantinib (Cabometyx) is recommended. For cancers with certain gene mutations or other features, biomarker-based therapy may also be an option for recurrence. See Guide 1 on the next page. If the therapies discussed above aren’t available or appropriate, joining a clinical trial is strongly encouraged. Metastatic cancer Thyroid cancer that spreads to areas far from the neck is known as metastatic. Metastatic tumors can form anywhere but are most common in the lungs, liver, muscles, bones, brain, and spinal cord. If the cancer takes up iodine, RAI therapy is recommended to treat metastatic papillary, follicular, or oncocytic thyroid cancers. Local therapies, such as radiation therapy, may also be used to treat areas of cancer directly. If RAI therapy isn’t an option If the cancer doesn't take up iodine, targeted therapy may be an option. But, if the metastatic tumors are growing slowly (or not at all) and aren't causing symptoms, monitoring the cancer may be a better option. Some people live with their thyroid cancer for months or years without needing treatment. You will continue to take levothyroxine to keep your TSH level down. To learn whether you are eligible for treatment with a targeted therapy or immunotherapy, biomarker testing is recommended. This testing is described in more detail on page Recommended targeted therapies for metastatic cancer that can't be treated with surgery or RAI are listed in Guide Other systemic therapies are available and may be recommended if those listed in Guide 1 aren't available or appropriate. Joining a clinical trial is strongly encouraged for everyone with metastatic thyroid cancer.
