About ALL What is ALL? What are lymphocytes? What is blood? What's in this book? What can you do to get the best care? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer diagnosed in children. It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book covers treatment for ALL in infants, children, and young adults. What is ALL? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting white blood cells of your immune system called lymphocytes. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts (or blasts). Lymphoblasts can crowd out normal bone marrow. This leads to less blood being made. There are 2 main types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your child's care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems due to pressure on the windpipe and blood vessels. In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, T-LL, or T-LBL. ALL in those under 30 years of age Pediatric refers to ALL found in infants, children, and young adults. Pediatric includes anyone 18 years of age or under, and certain adolescents and young adults (AYAs). AYAs are those 15 to 39 years of age at the time of initial cancer diagnosis. An AYA can be treated in pediatric or adult centers depending on the type of cancer. This book applies to AYAs who are being treated at a pediatric or children’s cancer center. More information for those seeking ALL treatment at an adult cancer center can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are lymphocytes? A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell found in blood and lymph tissue, as well as all organs in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: h B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. What is blood? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. Usually in ALL, there are too many abnormal white blood cells (lymphoblasts). How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very immature to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. After a blood stem cell develops into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet, it is released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. ALL is thought to arise from stem cells that make an increased amount of lymphoid progenitor cells. Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. ALL affects the lymphoid progenitor cells, which develop into a type of white blood cell called lymphocytes. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® (NCCN®). www.nccn.org What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for ALL provides an overview of tests your child might receive, how fertility might be impacted by treatment, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy. Other types of systemic therapy might be given. Chapter 4: Supportive care discusses what is supportive care and possible side effects of treatment. Chapter 5: BCR::ABL1-negative or BCR::ABL1-like B-ALL discusses treatment for the most common type of B-ALL. A clinical trial is the preferred treatment for these types of B-ALL. Chapter 6: BCR::ABL1-positive B-ALL treatment aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL protein caused by the BCR::ABL1 gene. Treatment is usually an intensive combination of systemic therapies. Chapter 7: T-ALL discusses a group of cancers that start in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL is less common than B-ALL. Treatment options include a clinical trial or chemotherapy. Chapter 8: Infant ALL treatment is different than for other age groups. Infants are those under 12 months of age. Chapter 9: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for your child and yourself. You have an important role to play in their care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with the care team. Consider seeking the opinion of an ALL specialist and treatment at an experienced children’s (pediatric) leukemia center. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss care with your child's team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask the care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for your child! 2 Testing for ALL General health tests Blood tests Fertility (all genders) Imaging tests Heart tests Lumbar puncture Bone marrow tests Testing for ALL biomarker and genetic changes B-ALL risk groups Pharmacogenomic testing Key points Questions to ask Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat ALL. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests and what to expect. lymphoblasts. In certain cases, a diagnosis of ALL is possible with less than 20 percent lymphoblasts. ALL can be found in bone marrow, blood, and organs such as the testicles or the central nervous system (CNS). In general, to be diagnosed with ALL, 20 percent or more lymphoblasts must be present in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 bone marrow cells are Results from blood and bone marrow tests and imaging studies will be used to determine your child's treatment plan. Tests used to diagnose ALL can be found in Guide
