Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas 69 Overview 70 Treatment 71 Key points 71 Questions to ask Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) has overlapping features of primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). Treatment is usually chemotherapy. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for you. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). Those with gray zone lymphomas are best managed in cancer centers with experience in treating this type of lymphoma. Overview Gray zone lymphomas have overlapping features of non-Hodgkin primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). This means that the cells are large but can vary in size and might look similar to Hodgkin cells (Reed-Sternberg cells). Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus. There are 2 main types of gray zone lymphomas: Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) h Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal lymphomas are growths found behind the breastbone (sternum) in the part of the chest that separates the lungs and holds the heart. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). They are treated differently. Primary mediastinal lymphomas are discussed in Chapter MGZLs are more commonly seen in those between 20 to 40 years of age, assigned male at birth. They are characterized by the presence of a large mediastinal mass. Lymph nodes above the collar bone (supraclavicular) may be involved. An expert hematopathologist review is essential to confirm the diagnosis of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma. Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas occur in older persons, have a higher rate of bone marrow involvement, include disease outside the lymph nodes (extranodal disease), and have more advanced-stage disease than mediastinal gray zone lymphomas. However, those with cancer found outside the mediastinum (extra-mediastinal disease) should be diagnosed as having DLBCL, not otherwise specified (DLBCL-NOS), see page Treatment Since MGZL has features of both classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) and non-Hodgkin PMBL, treatment is a challenge. Currently, there is no standard of care or agreement on treatment. MGZL is usually treated with chemotherapy. If the tumor cells are , rituximab might be added to chemotherapy. This is called chemoimmunotherapy. Involvedsite radiation therapy (ISRT) may be added in those with localized disease. For possible systemic therapy options, see Guide
