Liver cancer basics The liver Liver cancer How liver cancer spreads Risk factors Hepatitis Liver cancer screening Key points The liver is a large organ located on the right side of the body under the rib cage. The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts work together to make, store, and secrete bile. Bile is a fluid that helps digest fat in the food you eat. The liver also filters your blood and makes other important substances called factors that help your body function normally. This chapter will discuss the liver and give an overview of liver cancer. The liver The liver is a large organ located on the right side of the body under the rib cage. Inside the liver is a network of blood and lymph vessels. The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. The liver also produces lymph. Lymph gives cells water and food and contains white blood cells that fight germs. The liver has two lobes, a right and left lobe. Blood enters the liver from the hepatic artery and the portal vein. Blood leaves the liver through the hepatic veins before entering the inferior vena cava and returning to the heart. The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum). The liver and nearby organs The gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, spleen, and small intestine are found near the liver. Bile Liver cells make bile. Bile is a yellow or green fluid made up of cholesterol, bilirubin, salts such as potassium and sodium, water, and other elements found in the body. It flows into small channels that drain into thin tubes called ducts. These ducts form larger and larger channels that flow into the left and right hepatic ducts. The left and right hepatic ducts join to form the common hepatic duct. The common hepatic duct joins with the cystic duct that connects to the gallbladder to form the common bile duct. The common bile duct is joined by the pancreatic duct just before it enters the small intestine. The gallbladder The gallbladder is a small, pear-shaped organ found under the liver. It is sometimes described as sac-like because it holds bile from the liver. Bile is stored in the gallbladder, and when you eat, it then passes through the bile ducts into the small intestine to help digest food. The hepatobiliary system The liver is part of the hepatobiliary system. “Hepato” means liver and “biliary” refers to the gallbladder and bile ducts. Together, they form the hepatobiliary system. The hepatobiliary system makes bile and is a part of the digestive system. The digestive system takes in food, breaks it down, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. Some doctors consider the pancreas to be a part of this system. Liver blood supply Blood enters the liver through the hepatic artery and portal vein. Blood exits the liver through the hepatic vein. Credit: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/ File:Diagramshowingthetwolobesoftheliver anditsbloodsupplyCRUKsvg Liver cancer Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer. Secondary liver cancer is when other cancer types spread to the liver. For example, cancer can start in the intestines (colon) and spread to the liver. This is called metastatic colon cancer to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). There is a subtype of HCC called fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FLHC). FLHC affects very few people and usually occurs at a younger age. The second most common type of primary liver cancer in adults is called intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, which is a cancer of the bile ducts. Other primary liver cancers in adults include rare types of sarcoma that start in the blood vessel cells of the liver. Another rare type is made of both hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. This is called a mixed-type tumor. More information on gallbladder and bile duct tumors is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. In the following pages, this patient guideline will focus on the most common type of liver cancer, HCC, and its treatment. How liver cancer spreads Liver cancer can spread in many ways. It can spread directly through the liver. It can also spread to an area far from the primary tumor called a distant metastasis. Liver cancer most often metastasizes to the lung or bone. This is called metastatic liver cancer. Inside the liver are blood and lymphatic vessels. Cancer can spread from the liver through the blood and lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is made up of a network of vessels that carry a clear fluid called lymph. Lymph gives cells water and food, and it has white blood cells that fight germs. Lymph nodes filter lymph and remove the germs. Although possible, HCC does not commonly spread to nearby lymph nodes. Risk factors Risk is your chance of developing liver cancer. Everyone has some risk for developing liver cancer. However, some people are at increased risk. Risk factors can be activities that people do, things in the environment, or traits passed from biological parents to children through genes. Genes are a set of instructions that tell new cells what to become (for example, heart, liver, and skin) and what to do (make hormones, absorb nutrients, and kill germs). Risk is based on: Those with cirrhosis Those without cirrhosis Known risk factors are listed in Guide Cirrhosis Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver. It is a type of long-term (chronic) liver disease where liver cells are replaced by scar tissue. If you have cirrhosis, you should be screened for liver cancer. Cirrhosis can be caused by: Hepatitis B virus or infection Hepatitis C virus or infection h Alcohol use Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) h Genetic hemochromatosis Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis h Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency h Other causes of cirrhosis Guide 1 Risk factors for developing liver cancer Those with cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program Risk factors for those with cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus or infection • Hepatitis C virus or infection • Alcohol use • Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) • Genetic hemochromatosis • Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis • Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency • Other causes of cirrhosis Risk factors for those without cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus (HBV) or infection • Additional risk factors include HBV carrier with family history of liver cancer, Asian male assigned sex at birth 40 years of age or over, Asian female assigned sex at birth 50 years of age or over, and African/North American Black persons with hepatitis B Hepatitis Hepatitis is a type of liver disease. Viruses called hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are spread by contact with blood and other bodily fluids. HBV and HCV can cause chronic hepatitis, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), liver failure, and liver cancer. If you have chronic HBV, you should be screened for liver cancer. Other risk factors High alcohol use can cause damage to the liver. Having NAFLD may lead to cirrhosis in those who drink little or no alcohol. NAFLD is seen in those with high weight, diabetes, high cholesterol, or other conditions. Diabetes, high weight, or other problems with processing sugar may put someone at risk for liver cancer. Genetic hemochromatosis is an inherited condition that causes the liver to store too much iron from food. Liver cancer screening Screening helps find disease early before symptoms occur, when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Two tests are recommended every 6 months for those at risk of developing liver cancer. They include: An ultrasound (US) An alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) test An ultrasound is a test that uses sound waves to take pictures of the inside of the body. A blood test checks for the protein AFP. An elevated or rising AFP might be a sign of primary liver cancer. This is cancer that starts in the liver. Follow-up steps after a screening ultrasound may include: If AFP is elevated or an ultrasound finds nodules that are 10 millimeters (mm) or larger, then you will have more tests. Nodules are small, round areas of tissue. Not all nodules are cancer. h If an ultrasound finds nodules that are smaller than , repeat the ultrasound and AFP in 3 to 6 months. If an ultrasound is negative, repeat the ultrasound and AFP in 6 months. Key points The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. It also produces lymph. The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts are part of the hepatobiliary system. Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer. Secondary liver cancer is when other cancer types spread to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HCC is the focus of this book. Anything that increases your chances of developing liver cancer is called a risk factor. Screening is when tests are done on a regular basis to detect a disease in someone without symptoms. If you have cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B, then you should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program. Screening helps find disease early when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Although living with liver disease is physically and emotionally challenging, I have been able to live a normal life – traveling, snorkeling, having children. So, do not limit yourself and do not hold back from doing something because you are scared or you are worried about the 'what ifs.' If you live your life with those limitations, you’ll have no life at all.” 2 Diagnosing liver cancer Test results General health tests Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Performance status Key points Liver cancer is usually confirmed with imaging tests. More tests will be done to plan treatment. Sometimes, a biopsy is needed to confirm cancer. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about the specific type of cancer you have. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on your exact type of cancer, as well as any treatments and the date each treatment started. A list of tests used for treatment planning can be found in Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your health care provider will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin.
