About basal cell skin cancer What is basal cell skin cancer? How is basal cell skin cancer treated? What can you do to get the best care? Basal cell skin cancer, also known as basal cell carcinoma (BCC), is the most common type of skin cancer. About 3 million cases of basal cell skin cancer are diagnosed every year in the United States. The good news is it can be cured in most cases. Treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Keep reading to find out more. What is basal cell skin cancer? Basal cell skin cancer is the most common of all skin cancer types. If caught early, it is easily treatable and curable. This is because it rarely metastasizes (spreads). Skin cancers often occur in the top layer of the skin (epidermis) and less commonly in the middle layer of the skin (dermis). The epidermis is made up of basal cells and other cells. Basal cell skin cancer occurs when some basal cells become abnormal and grow out of control. This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body. Skin lesions Basal cell skin cancer is often found on the face, head, and neck. Here is a basal cell lesion pictured on a person's cheek. Skin basics Did you know that your skin is your body’s largest organ and if you measured it it would stretch to about 20 square feet? Working as a barrier, your skin protects you from bacteria and chemicals and helps control your body temperature. It has 3 layers: Epidermis – The top layer of skin provides a waterproof barrier and creates skin color (melanin). Dermis – The middle layer involves connective tissue, blood vessels, oil and sweat glands, nerves, and hair follicles. Hypodermis – The deepest tissue layer is made up of fat and connective tissue. Most skin cancers form in the cells of the epidermis. It has 3 main types of cells: Squamous cells – These cells are flat cells found in the upper part of the epidermis. Basal cells – Found in the lower part of the epidermis, basal cells constantly divide to form new cells that replace the squamous cells on the skin’s surface. Melanocytes – Melanocytes are cells located in the lower part of the epidermis that produce melanin. Melanin is responsible for our hair, skin, and eye color. It also protects our skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. This book is only about basal cell skin cancer. For more information on squamous cell skin cancer or melanoma, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes. In lighter skin, its lesions can look like any of the following: h Flat, pale or yellow areas, like a scar h Red patches that might be itchy Small, pink or red, shiny bumps that may have blue, brown, or black areas Open sores that don’t heal and might bleed, or go away and come back In darker (brown and black) skin, basal cell skin cancer can appear as a brown or glossy black bump with a rolled border. It can be mistaken for a normal mole. Be sure to look out for any new, changing, bleeding, or unusual skin growths. Skin cancer is easier to cure when it is caught early. To find out how basal cell skin cancer is diagnosed, read Chapter 2: Testing for basal cell skin cancer. Causes and risk factors Basal cell skin cancer is caused by exposure to UV radiation from the sun or other sources like tanning beds. UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function. If the DNA inside cells becomes damaged, the cells can become abnormal and grow out of control. You’re more likely to have basal cell skin cancer if you have certain risk factors. A risk factor increases the chance of developing cancer. Risk factors for basal cell skin cancer include: UV light exposure – UV light (radiation) that comes from the sun or tanning beds increases your risk. Fair skin, red or blond hair, or light eye color – People with lighter-colored skin are at a higher risk of developing skin cancer because melanin (skin pigment) filters out the sun's harmful UV rays. Age – Risk increases with age because sun exposure builds up over time. But skin cancer is becoming more common in younger people. History of skin cancer – If you or someone in your family has had skin cancer, you’re more likely to develop any type of skin cancer. Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer. Immune suppression – People with weakened immune systems from organ transplants or autoimmune diseases are at higher risk for basal cell skin cancer. How is basal cell skin cancer treated? Basal cell skin cancer is highly treatable and curable. Catching it and treating it early is key. Surgery is the most common treatment for basal cell skin cancer. In some cases, radiation therapy or systemic therapy might be used to treat it. Following your treatment, you will have full skin exams with your doctor at least once a year. Between these periods, prevention is important. See Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence for more information. Recurrence is when basal cell skin cancer returns to the area where it was originally found, or it has metastasized (spread) to the lymph nodes or to distant parts of the body. But there are several options for how to treat it. Read more about how your cancer is treated in Chapter 3: Types of treatment and Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! Why you should read this resource Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. 2 Testing for basal cell skin cancer 10 General health tests 12 Biopsy 13 Imaging 13 What’s next 14 Key points 14 Questions to ask Treatment planning starts with testing. Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and then treat basal cell skin cancer. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Whether you or your doctor found a concerning lesion on your skin, testing is needed to identify and diagnose basal cell skin cancer. The diagnosis is based on the results in your medical and family history, a physical exam, skin exam, and biopsy, and, in some cases, imaging studies. See Guide Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean, so keep reading for more details.
