Prostate cancer basics What is prostate cancer? What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? What causes prostate cancer? What is advanced-stage prostate cancer? Can prostate cancer be cured? What’s the best treatment? Key points The prostate is a gland located deep inside the pelvis. Everyone with a prostate has a chance of getting prostate cancer. This chapter offers an overview of this common cancer. What is prostate cancer? Prostate cancer is a disease where cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. The prostate is a gland located just below the bladder in the pelvis, deep inside the area of your body between your hip bones. The prostate is an important part of the male reproductive system. Besides the prostate, the male reproductive system includes the penis, seminal vesicles, and testicles. Prostate cancer is one of the most common types of cancer. Cancer is what happens when something goes wrong with the natural cell process, which causes some cells to grow out of control. Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells develop genetic changes (mutations) that allow them to multiply and make many more cancer cells. The cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. This can end up harming the body. Cancer cells can survive much longer than normal cells do. They can replace many normal cells and cause organs to stop working well. Cancer cells can also spread outside the prostate to other areas of the body. The prostate gland is an important part of the male reproductive system. It’s located in the pelvis just below the bladder and is typically about the size of a pingpong ball. What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? A symptom is a feeling or problem that can indicate a disease or condition. Prostate cancer often grows slowly and shows no symptoms for a long time. You don’t have to have symptoms to have prostate cancer. Symptoms, if they occur, may include: Blood in the urine or semen Burning or pain while urinating Unexplained weight loss Bone, hip, or back pain It’s important to know that prostate cancer has many of the same symptoms as a condition called enlarged prostate (also called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH). An enlarged prostate can push against the bladder and compress the urethra, which slows the flow of urine and can cause a feeling that you haven’t fully emptied your bladder. BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms, because you may need special testing: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation What causes prostate cancer? Many people who develop prostate cancer wonder where it came from and how they got it. Cancer researchers don’t know exactly what causes prostate cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). The fact is, everyone with a prostate has a risk of getting prostate cancer. But several factors are linked to a higher risk of prostate cancer. These are called risk factors. A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting cancer. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause prostate cancer, but people with prostate cancer usually have one or more of these risk factors: Age The biggest risk factor for prostate cancer is age. Prostate cancer is diagnosed most often in those aged 65 years and above. Your chances of getting prostate cancer increase as you become older. Family history Your family health history is information about the diseases and health conditions in your family. A family history reflects a pattern of certain diseases among family members. Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is a gland located in the pelvis—the area between your hips. The prostate is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a fluid that nourishes and helps transmit sperm. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis. Urethra: A tube that carries urine from the bladder and out of the body. The prostate surrounds the urethra just beneath the bladder. Seminal vesicles: Two glands that make and store another part of the fluid that becomes semen. The seminal vesicles are located above the prostate and behind the bladder. Bladder: An organ that holds urine. Having a close family member with prostate cancer (a sibling or parent) increases the chance of getting it yourself. Those with a family history of certain other cancers (breast, ovarian, colon, pancreatic, and other cancers) may also be at higher risk for prostate cancer. Genetic factors When cancer “runs in the family,” genetic testing can be done to find specific genetic changes (mutations) known to be linked with prostate cancer and other cancers. For instance, having an inherited genetic change in the BRCA2 gene increases the risk of getting prostate cancer. There are also genetic abnormalities that don’t run in families and aren’t inherited. Race In the United States, Black males are more likely than white males to develop prostate cancer. Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed. Black males are also twice as likely to die from prostate cancer compared to white males. Hispanic and Asian males are less likely than both white and Black males to be diagnosed with prostate cancer. Several things contribute to these differences, such as barriers to accessing health care (including early detection screening), as well as biological and genetic factors, and other causes. Researchers are trying to understand the reasons for these differences and what can be done to improve outcomes. What does aggressive mean? When health care professionals describe cancer as aggressive, they mean the cancer is likely to grow or spread more rapidly than average. Aggressive can also be used to describe therapy that may be stronger or more intense than other treatment options. Black males may want to talk with their health care providers about getting screening tests earlier and perhaps more often than what’s recommended for other males. Diet and lifestyle No one particular diet has been found to cause prostate cancer or to prevent it. However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Smoking and obesity also increase the risks of developing and dying from prostate cancer. On the other hand, those who eat more fruits and vegetables have a lower risk of developing advanced prostate cancer. Exercise and maintaining a healthy weight may also decrease the aggressiveness of prostate cancer and the likelihood of dying from it. Early vs. advanced prostate cancer Early-stage prostate cancer has not visibly spread beyond the prostate. It usually grows slowly and stays in the prostate. This is also called localized prostate cancer. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has grown outside the prostate and spread to other areas in the body such as distant lymph nodes (bottom left), bones, or organs like the liver or lungs (bottom right). This is also called metastatic prostate cancer. What is advanced-stage prostate cancer? Prostate cancer can be grouped into earlystage cancer or advanced-stage cancer. Early stage Early-stage prostate cancer has not spread beyond the prostate. The cancer usually grows slowly and stays in the prostate. Cancer that is contained entirely within the prostate is called localized prostate cancer. More information about early-stage prostate cancer can be found in the NCCN Guideline for Patients: Early-Stage Prostate Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Advanced stage Advanced stage means that the cancer has spread beyond the prostate to other areas in the body. This spreading is called metastasis or metastatic cancer. Metastatic prostate cancer may spread to the lymph nodes, bones, liver, lungs, and other organs. This book is all about advanced-stage prostate cancer. Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby areas such as lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer. (It’s also called locally advanced prostate cancer. This book will call it regional prostate cancer to avoid confusion between localized and locally advanced.) Cancer that spreads beyond the prostate to other parts of the body is called distant metastatic prostate cancer or simply metastatic prostate cancer. How does prostate cancer spread? Cancer cells use the bloodstream like a highway to travel to distant areas in the body. Cancer cells can also spread through the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is a network of organs and vessels that fights infections and circulates a clear fluid called lymph throughout the body. A normal and important part of the lymphatic system are the lymph nodes. Lymph nodes are small, disease-fighting clusters that filter lymph fluid to remove germs. Lymph vessels and nodes are found everywhere in the body. Some patients have advanced-stage prostate cancer when they’re first diagnosed. Others develop advanced-stage cancer after having treatment for early-stage cancer. Can prostate cancer be cured? Advanced-stage prostate cancer is usually a life-long disease. But treatment can slow down its growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. Treatments for advancedstage prostate cancer include hormone therapy, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, radiopharmaceuticals, surgery, and other therapies. It’s true that prostate cancer in the advanced stage can be fatal for some patients. But in the past few years, improved detection methods and better treatments have been reducing the number of deaths from prostate cancer in patients of all races and ethnicities. Many people with advanced-stage prostate cancer continue to live with the cancer and, in the end, may die from something else. Scientists have learned a great deal about prostate cancer in recent years. As a result, today’s detection methods and treatments work better than those in the past. Also, many patients with prostate cancer have more treatment choices now than they had before. What’s the best treatment? The best treatment for prostate cancer is the treatment that’s right for you. Your team will work with you to figure out the therapies that have the best chance for fighting your particular cancer. Importantly, your team should follow best practices. This book is based on the best practices for treating advanced-stage prostate cancer. Best practices come from the latest research and methods at top cancer centers. Your treatment team should personalize your care following the best practices. Many new tests and treatments are now available for advanced prostate cancer. If possible, seek care or a second opinion from a medical center that specializes in prostate cancer. Key points Prostate cancer develops when cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. Age is the leading risk factor for prostate cancer. As you age, your chances of developing prostate cancer increase. Having a close family member with prostate cancer means that you have a higher chance of getting it yourself. Everyone with a prostate is at risk for prostate cancer. Black people and people with certain inherited genetic mutations are at greater risk. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spreading is called metastasis. Advanced-stage prostate cancer is usually a life-long disease. Treatment can slow it down, reduce its symptoms, and help people live longer. 2 Tests for advanced prostate cancer Common prostate tests General health history Diagnostic tests Genetic tests Tumor staging What’s next? Key points If you haven’t yet been diagnosed with prostate cancer, you may need multiple tests and scans to find out if you have it and whether it has spread. These tests and scans will help your team make the best plan to treat your prostate cancer. Health care providers use a variety of tests to find prostate cancer and to determine how advanced the cancer is. Tests are used to plan treatment, check how well treatment is working, and monitor your health after treatment ends. This chapter describes what tests you might have and what to expect during testing. Not every person with prostate cancer will receive every test listed here. When you go for testing, bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Common prostate tests Common prostate cancer tests are used to detect the possibility of prostate cancer in someone who’s undiagnosed. They’re also used to check and monitor prostate cancer in patients who have been diagnosed. Two common tests that look for prostate cancer are the PSA test and digital rectal exam. PSA test This is a blood test that measures the amount of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in your bloodstream. PSA is a protein made inside the prostate gland. Its job is to help semen transport sperm. All prostate cells, both normal cells and cancer cells, make PSA. If there’s something wrong with the prostate— like prostate cancer—the prostate may make more PSA. While most PSA goes into semen, a little bit ends up in the bloodstream, too. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer. Likewise, an increase in PSA after treatment may indicate that the treatment is losing effectiveness. However, age and other factors—such as an enlarged prostate or a urinary tract infection— can also cause high levels of PSA. This means that a PSA test by itself can’t provide a diagnosis of prostate cancer. That’s why a PSA test is often paired with imaging or a digital rectal exam, or both, to decide whether you need a biopsy. PSA level (also called total PSA) is measured in nanograms of PSA per milliliter of blood. Digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam (also called a prostate exam) may be an awkward and unpleasant form of testing. But it’s the simplest and most direct way to check the size and texture of your prostate. For this test, the doctor will insert a gloved finger into your rectum to feel your prostate for any signs of cancer. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during a digital rectal exam, though. So it’s usually paired with a PSA test and other factors— your age, race, family history, and more—to determine whether you need further testing. General health history Health history and physical exam Your care team needs to have all your health information. They’ll ask you about any health problems and treatments you’ve had in your life. Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your team about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of your regular medications and any over-the-counter medicines, herbs, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your care team needs to know if you’re taking them. A physical exam is a check of your body for any signs of disease. Your health care provider Taking supplements? Bring a list of your medicines to your doctor’s office when you begin testing. It’s also important to tell your treatment team if you’re using any complementary medicines, especially supplements, vitamins, or herbs. Some of these can interfere with your cancer tests or treatment. This may reduce the effectiveness of treatment or cause more side effects. may feel for enlarged glands (lymph nodes) in your groin, underarms, and neck. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of the family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members if any relatives had cancer, at what age they were diagnosed, and if they died from it. Also ask family members about other health issues like heart disease, stroke, and diabetes. Share this information with your care team and update your team with any changes to your family history. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems). You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has full and upto-date information about how you’re doing. Diagnostic tests Diagnostic tests are used to confirm you have cancer. They’re also used to find out if the cancer is localized or advanced. Diagnostic tests can help plan treatment after you’ve been diagnosed and can detect whether the cancer is still growing or spreading after treatment. Diagnostic tests include imaging scans, biopsies, and genetic tests. Imaging tests An imaging test takes pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images can reveal cancer, including its size, location, and other features such as the size of the prostate itself. The images may show where the cancer started (primary tumor) and whether the cancer has spread (metastasized). After your scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist. A radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in reading imaging tests. The radiologist will send the results to your care team. This information helps to plan the next steps of your care. Your team will discuss the results with you. Be sure to ask any questions you may have. Diagnosis vs. prognosis What’s the difference between your diagnosis and your prognosis? These two words sound alike but they’re very different. Diagnosis is identifying an illness based on tests. Your diagnosis names what illness you have. Prognosis is the likely course and outcome of a disease. Your prognosis predicts how your illness will turn out. Imaging can come before, during, or after a biopsy. Imaging may also be used after cancer treatment to see how well it worked and to check if the cancer comes back. Imaging methods for prostate cancer include MRI, CT, PET, ultrasound, bone scan, or a combination of these. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. An MRI can be used to get a more detailed view of the cancer within the prostate. It’s also used to see if cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes or to the bones in your pelvis. MRI scans can also help to plan treatment, and may be used after treatment to check whether the cancer has come back (recurrence). An appointment for an MRI scan can take 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still. Because an MRI uses magnets, you can’t bring any metal objects (such as jewelry, phones, wristwatches, or belts with metal buckles) into the imaging room. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. CT takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. The computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a single detailed image. A CT scan is usually completed in less than 30 minutes. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. You may have a PET scan after you’ve been diagnosed to determine the extent of your cancer or to see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. A PET scan requires injecting a radioactive substance called a tracer into your bloodstream. It takes about an hour for the tracer to circulate throughout your body. The tracer targets your cancer cells, which show up as bright spots on the scan. Afterward, the radiotracer is passed out of your body in your urine. A PET scan appointment can take 1 to 2 hours, including about 30 minutes of actual scanning time. Because PET uses a different imaging method, it’s often combined with other types of imaging, such as CT or MRI, to provide an even more PET imaging A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan can determine the extent of your cancer or see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. detailed image. This combined method is called a PET/CT or PET/MRI scan. PSMA-PET PET scans use different types of tracers. The most common tracer in prostate cancer locates a protein called prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) on the surface of prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells can make a lot of PSMA, so doctors developed tracers that target this specific protein. Not everyone with prostate cancer will need a PSMA-PET scan. It’s mostly used to monitor prostate cancer for recurrence. It’s also used to determine whether targeted therapy can treat certain cases of metastatic prostate cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastasis, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones. Areas of bone damage absorb more tracer than healthy bone. These areas show up as bright spots in the scans. Ultrasound Ultrasound imaging is commonly used to help guide a biopsy of the prostate. This is called transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) imaging. During a biopsy, an ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum. The probe is about the size of a finger. The device uses highenergy sound waves to create a view of the prostate from inside the body. These images allow the surgeon to remove a small sample of the prostate without having to open up your abdomen. PET/CT scan of prostate cancer This image combines PET and CT scans to show a cross-section of a patient’s pelvis. The greenish circle identifies cancer in the prostate, while the intense red dot indicates cancer that has spread to a lymph node in the pelvis. At some centers, your saved MRI images can be combined with real-time ultrasound to provide a more detailed view for a more precise biopsy. This is called MRI-TRUS fusion. Biopsy A biopsy is a procedure in which a sample of cells, fluid, or tissue is removed from your body and tested for cancer. It’s the main way to confirm whether you have cancer. A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk. The risks for a prostate biopsy include infection, bleeding, and pain. Doctors use invasive tests only when needed. You and your care team will decide when, or if, you need a biopsy. A biopsy sample may be taken from the prostate, the metastasis (an area of cancer that has spread outside of the prostate), or sometimes both. Biopsy of the prostate A prostate biopsy is usually performed by a urologist. A urologist is a doctor who’s an PSMA-PET scan of prostate cancer A CT scan for a patient treated for prostate cancer shows a crosssection of the body at the pelvis. The CT pinpoints a lymph node that appears normal (top image). But a PMSA-PET scan of the same lymph node highlights prostate cancer cells (arrow in bottom image). Images: University of Chicago Medicine expert in treating diseases of the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. For this procedure, you’ll lie on your side with your knees curled up or you’ll lie on your back with your legs raised. You’ll be given anesthesia to numb the pain or to make you fall asleep. The urologist will insert a lubricated probe into your rectum. The probe provides a visual image of the prostate. The urologist will then insert a hollow needle into the prostate gland using the video display to guide it. The needle is inserted either through the perineum (the skin between the anus and scrotum) or through the rectum. When the urologist removes the needle, it will pull out a small sample of prostate tissue called a core. A core sample is only about 1 to 2 millimeters wide and 12 to 20 millimeters long—about as wide as a toothpick and as long as a raisin. The urologist will usually take 12 or more core samples from different parts of the prostate. Checking different areas provides a more complete evaluation of cancer throughout the gland. After the biopsy samples are removed, a specialist called a pathologist will examine the samples under a microscope and test them for cancer cells. The pathologist will find out how many of the core samples contain cancer and will also measure the percentage of cancer in each core. With this information, the pathologist can estimate the amount of cancer in the prostate and how aggressive it may be. Also, by knowing where each core sample was taken, the pathologist can tell if the cancer is concentrated in a certain section of the prostate. The pathologist will put these results into a report. Ask your doctor or another member of Biopsy of the prostate A biopsy removes a sample of tissue that is tested for cancer. This is a transperineal biopsy, in which a needle is inserted through the perineum and into the prostate. An ultrasound probe, which goes into the rectum, helps the doctor guide the needle into the prostate. MRI scans of your prostate may be combined with the ultrasound image to provide a highly accurate picture of the cancer. your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function. As a result of this mutation, the gene isn’t able to make a normal protein so the protein can’t do its necessary job. This can affect the usual activities of the cell, which can lead to disease, such as cancer. Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be in your body before you’re born (called a hereditary or germline mutation) or occur by Biopsy of the metastasis Prostate cancer may metastasize to lymph nodes, bones, or internal organs. A biopsy of a metastasis (as seen here, taken from the liver) uses a hollow needle to remove a small core of tissue. The tissue is tested in a lab to look for cancer cells. chance or environmental factors later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are hereditary gene testing and tumor testing: Hereditary gene testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Your siblings or other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your health care provider might suggest genetic testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. This is also called germline testing. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for inherited (germline) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, this testing typically looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others. Having a hereditary mutation doesn’t mean you’ll automatically get cancer. It means your chances for developing certain cancers is higher. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. Inherited mutations in genes like BRCA1 or BRCA2 are also related to breast cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, and skin cancer (melanoma). Inherited mutations in MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2 are related to colorectal cancer, uterine cancer, and other cancers in addition to prostate cancer. If an inherited cancer risk gene is suspected based on your family’s or your own health history, you should ask about genetic testing. Your health care provider can talk to you about testing or refer you to a genetic counselor. A genetic counselor is an expert who has special training in genetic diseases. A genetic counselor can help you decide whether you would like to undergo germline testing and also help you interpret the results of these tests. Inherited gene testing is recommended if you have prostate cancer and any of the following: Family members or relatives who have or had prostate cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, intestinal cancer, and certain other cancers Family history of mutations in certain genes including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, and others Very-high-risk, high-risk, regional (cancer in a lymph node), or metastatic prostate cancer regardless of family history h Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry Talk to your medical providers and/or a genetic counselor about your family history of cancer. Tumor testing Tumor testing (also called somatic testing, molecular tumor testing, or tumor profiling) requires a tissue sample from the tumor itself or from a metastasis in a lymph node, bone, liver, lung, or other affected area. Or it may come a sample of your blood, which contains the tumor’s DNA. In this type of testing, the sample is analyzed to look at its molecular components. Tumors often release molecules that can be used as clues for finding and learning about the cancer. This information helps figure out the likelihood that your cancer could spread to other parts of the body. It can also help predict whether the cancer could transform into a more aggressive type. Importantly, targeted therapies (PARP inhibitors, for example) can be used against cancers that have particular molecular tumor markers. So the testing looks for specific abnormalities in a number of genes involved in DNA repair, including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, PALB2, FANCA, and others. Tumor staging Tumors come in different shapes and sizes. So it’s not easy to compare one tumor to another. To solve this problem, cancer experts created the tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system to describe any tumor. It’s based on the results of your imaging scans, biopsies, and blood tests. In this system, the letters T, N, and M stand for different areas of cancer growth: T (tumor) – Describes the size of the main (primary) tumor and if it has grown outside the prostate N (node) – Identifies whether cancer has spread to lymph nodes M (metastasis) – Indicates if cancer has spread (metastasized) to parts of the body outside of the pelvis Your provider will assign a number to each letter, based on your test results. The higher the number, the larger the tumor (T) or the more the cancer has spread (M). These scores are combined to assign a “stage” to the cancer. Staging is a way to describe how much cancer is in your body and how far it has spread. Knowing your stage is important for predicting the course of your disease and for making a treatment plan. Cancer staging is done when you’re first diagnosed. It may also be done after treatment to confirm that the stage hasn’t changed. How to read a TNM score Let’s say your prostate cancer is given a TNM score of T4, N1, MThis score means that the tumor has grown outside the prostate gland (T4) and has spread to nearby lymph nodes (N1) and to one or more distant parts of the body (M1). Why know your TNM score? For one, it lets you know the extent of your cancer. It also helps characterize your risk for the cancer to spread. Your level of risk helps indicate the most appropriate treatment for you. Measurements and assessments not covered in this book include PSA density, Gleason score, Grade Group, and risk groups. To learn more about these, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Early-Stage Prostate Cancer, which can be found at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What’s next? After you’ve had all these tests to confirm you have prostate cancer, your care team will discuss your test results and will work with you to develop a plan for treatment. The next chapter describes the different treatment options for advanced-stage prostate cancer. After that chapter, you’ll read about which of those treatments may be right for you and your particular type of cancer. Key points Tests are used to plan treatment and check how well treatment is working. An unusually high amount of PSA in the bloodstream may be a sign of prostate cancer. Imaging tests are used to see where the cancer has spread beyond the prostate. Imaging also shows the size and location of the cancer. A biopsy is a procedure that removes samples of cells or tissue, which are tested for cancer. A genetic test is used to find abnormal changes (mutations) in your genes. An inherited genetic mutation occurs in every cell in your body. A somatic mutation occurs all by itself and is only found in the cells of a tumor. To find out if you have an inherited risk for cancer, talk to your doctor about germline testing or ask to be referred to a genetic counselor. 3 Prostate cancer treatments Hormone therapy Non-hormone therapy Clinical trials Supportive care What’s next? Key points There’s more than one treatment for advanced prostate cancer. This chapter describes the available treatment options and what you might expect from them. Talk with your care team about which treatment could be best for you. Prostate cancer is a complex disease with many treatment options. Treatments for advanced-stage prostate cancer include hormone therapy as well as non-hormone therapies like chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and radiation therapy. Often, hormone therapy is combined with one or more other therapies. Combining therapies can be more effective than using either therapy alone. key word in ADT is “deprivation”—this therapy “deprives” (starves) the cancer of its main fuel: androgens. This can shrink the tumor or slow tumor growth for a while. You might hear the term “castration” used when describing prostate cancer or its treatment. This term describes a drastic reduction of testosterone. Castration can be done with hormone-lowering medication or by surgical removal of one or both testicles (orchiectomy). Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles. While drug hormone therapy can be reversed when the medication is stopped, orchiectomy is permanent and can’t be reversed. Surgical removal of the testicles is much less common these days because systemic Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a systemic (whole-body) treatment that adds, blocks, or removes hormones. A hormone is a natural chemical made by a gland in the body. Its job is to activate cells or organs. Male hormones are called androgens. The main androgen is testosterone. Most of the testosterone in the body is made by the testicles. Testosterone helps produce sperm, among other functions. But testosterone also helps prostate cancer grow. A type of hormone therapy called androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) can stop your body from making testosterone or block cancer cells from using testosterone. The What is ADT? Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) brings testosterone down to a very low level. ADT treatments include: LHRH agonist (goserelin, leuprolide or triptorelin) LHRH agonist anti-androgen (nilutamide, flutamide, or bicalutamide) LHRH antagonist (degarelix or relugolix) Surgical castration hormone therapy is often just as effective at blocking testosterone. Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer.
