Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest. The lungs move important gases in and out of the blood. You breathe in oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide (a gas made by cells) from the body. The lungs have sections called lobes. The left lung has 2 lobes and the right lung has 3 lobes. A thin layer of tissue surrounds the lungs called the pleural membrane. This membrane protects the lungs. Two large breathing tubes, called bronchi, connect the windpipe (trachea) to the lungs. There is one tube, called a bronchus, for each lung. Inside the lungs are small tubes (bronchioles) and small air sacs (alveoli). The respiratory system The air you breathe moves through a series of airways. It travels down your throat and through your windpipe (trachea). The windpipe splits into 2 airways called bronchi. Inside the lung, each bronchus branches off into the parts of the lung called lobes. The right lung has 3 lobes and the left lung has 2 lobes. The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood. Lung cancer Almost all lung cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Lung carcinomas start in the cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways of the lungs include the bronchus, bronchioles, and alveoli. There are different types of lung carcinoma. The main types are non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer. Other types of cancer can spread to the lungs, such as breast cancer. Breast cancer that has spread to the lungs is still called breast cancer. Non-small cell lung cancer Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a group of cancers that are the most common type of lung cancer. NSCLC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Adenocarcinoma starts in the mucusmaking cells that line the alveoli (small air sacs). This is the most common subtype. About 4 out of 10 lung cancers are adenocarcinomas. This is the most common type of lung cancer seen in those who don’t smoke or who don’t have a history of smoking. More information on NSCLC and SCLC is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Squamous cell (epidermoid) carcinoma starts in the flat cells that line the inside of the airways (bronchi) in the lungs. About 3 out of 10 lung cancers are squamous cell carcinomas. Large cell (undifferentiated) carcinoma starts in large cells that can grow anywhere in the lungs. This accounts for 5 out of 10 NSCLCs. Small cell lung cancer Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a fast-dividing cancer of the neuroendocrine cells. Under a microscope, the cancer cells look small and oval- or oat-shaped. It is the second most common type of lung cancer. About 1 out of every 10 lung cancers are SCLC. Early detection The goal of lung cancer screening is to find lung cancer at an early stage, even before there are any symptoms. This is when treatment will be most successful. Early detection of lung cancer helps prevent death. Together, you and your health care provider should discuss if screening is right for you. Key points The lungs are a pair of organs that move important gases in and out of the blood. Lung cancer starts in the cells that line the lungs. Most lung cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Lung carcinomas start in the cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways of the lungs include the bronchus, bronchioles, and alveoli. Lung cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Lung cancer found earlier is more likely to be treated successfully. Lung cancer screening is not recommended for everyone. Screening is for those at risk for developing lung cancer. Ask your health care provider if you qualify for lung cancer screening. Your wishes are always important. Talk to your health care provider and make your wishes known. 2 Risk assessment Risk factors Find out your level of risk Care team Start before you have symptoms Key points Risk is your chance of developing lung cancer. Some people are more likely than others to develop lung cancer. Anything that increases your chances of developing lung cancer is called a risk factor. Lung cancer screening is based on your risk factors described in this chapter. See your health care provider (HCP) regularly for checkups and cancer screenings, which may include screenings for skin, breast, prostate cancer, and other types of cancer. You might be asked to see your HCP more than every year based on your risk factors for developing lung cancer. As your family health history changes, it is important to keep your HCP updated. Risk factors Risk is your chance of developing lung cancer. Everyone has some risk for developing lung cancer. However, some people are at increased risk. Risk factors can be activities that people do, things in the environment, or traits passed down from biological parents to children through genes. Genes are a set of instructions that tell new cells what to become (for example, lung, heart, and skin) and what to do (make hormones, absorb nutrients, and kill germs). Known risk factors for lung cancer are listed in Guide
