About kidney cancer The kidneys How the kidneys work Kidney cancer RCC subtypes How kidney cancer spreads Key points The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. The kidneys make hormones and filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. This chapter will discuss the kidneys and provide an overview of kidney cancer. The kidneys The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. Each kidney is about the size of an adult’s fist. The kidney is covered by a thin layer of tissue, like the skin of an apple. This layer of tissue is called the renal capsule. Renal refers to the kidney. The kidneys are part of the urinary system. The urinary system is a group of organs that remove waste from the body in the form of urine (or pee). This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure. They also make hormones that tell the body to make more red blood cells. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The kidneys and urinary system The kidneys are the main organs of the urinary system. The ureters, bladder, and urethra hold and transport urine before it is released from the body. An adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. The kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by a layer of fat. Covering the fat is an outer layer of fibrous tissue called Gerota’s fascia. When kidney cancer grows into and beyond Gerota’s fascia, it is a sign of advanced kidney cancer. How the kidneys work The kidneys perform many jobs to keep your body healthy. The main job of the kidneys is to filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney. Blood then flows through tiny filtering tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Blood is cleaned as it flows through the renal tubules. The renal tubules remove waste and other substances from the blood. These substances are made into urine. The clean, filtered blood flows out of the kidney through the renal vein. The renal vein merges with a larger vein called the vena cava. The vena cava takes clean blood back up to the heart. Urine flows out of the renal tubules and collects in a hollow space in the middle of the kidney called the renal pelvis. Urine leaves the renal pelvis through a long tube called the The kidneys filter blood to remove waste Blood enters the kidney through the renal artery. Renal tubules remove excess water and other waste from the blood to make urine. Urine drips out of the renal tubules into the renal pelvis, then leaves the kidney through the ureter. Clean, filtered blood leaves the kidney through the renal vein. ureter. The ureter carries urine to the bladder. The bladder holds urine until it is released from the body when you urinate (or pee). A shorter tube, called the urethra, takes urine from the bladder to outside the body. Most people have two kidneys. However, each kidney works on its own and does not need the other to function. This means that the body can often work well with less than one complete kidney. Many people live full, healthy lives with only one kidney. Kidney cancer Kidney cancer starts in the tissues of the kidneys. Almost all kidney cancers are carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. In the kidneys, carcinomas most often start in the cells that line the renal tubules. This is called renal cell carcinoma (RCC). About 9 out of 10 kidney cancers are RCCs. RCC may appear as multiple tumors in one kidney or involve both kidneys. Because it is the most common type, RCC is often simply referred to as kidney cancer. RCC is the focus of this book. There are other, less common cancers that can arise in the kidney. While they can sometimes be confused with RCC, it is important to note that they are treated differently. Urothelial carcinoma starts in the cells that line the renal pelvis and ureter that drain the kidney. While these tumors can be found up the ureter near the kidneys, they are not kidney tumors. These tumors share many features with bladder cancer. These tumors used to be called transitional call cancer. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Bladder Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) usually occurs in young children. In Wilms tumor (WT), cancer cells are found in the kidney. Renal sarcoma starts in the blood vessels or connective tissue of the kidney. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Soft Tissue Sarcoma, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. RCC subtypes Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer. RCC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Tumor histology and other factors are an important part of choosing a treatment plan. Ask your care team about your cancer subtype. Clear cell RCC Clear cell RCC (ccRCC) is the most common subtype. It occurs in about 7 out of 10 people with RCC. Under a microscope, clear cells look very pale or clear. Non-clear cell RCC Non-clear cell RCC is also called nccRCC There are several subtypes. Papillary RCC is the most common subtype of nccRCC (about 1 out of 10 people with RCC). Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. This means that the cells of the cancer look like the cells of a sarcoma (cancer of the connective tissues, such as muscles, nerves, fat, blood vessels, and fibrous tissue). Sarcomatoid renal cancers occur in less than of RCC tumors but when present tend to grow more quickly than other types of kidney cancer and are more likely to spread to other parts of the body. This makes them more difficult to treat. How kidney cancer spreads Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Kidney cancer can also spread to other parts of the body in a process called metastasis. In metastasis, cancer cells travel through your blood or lymph to form new tumors outside of the kidney. The new tumors are called metastatic tumors or metastases. Local spread – In locally advanced disease, cancer has spread to a nearby area close to the primary tumor. Kidney cancer can invade nearby tissues like surrounding fat, blood vessels, lymph nodes, adrenal glands, and Gerota’s fascia. Distant metastasis – In metastatic disease, cancer has spread to distant parts of the body far from the primary site. Kidney cancer tends to spread to distant sites such as the lungs, lymph nodes, and bones, and less frequently to the liver and brain. Multiple tumors in one or both kidneys are not considered metastasis and are treated as separate primary tumors. Treatment will be based on the size, known or suspected subtype, and location of the tumor(s). Key points h The kidneys filter blood to remove extra water and other waste the body doesn’t need. Blood flows into the kidney through the renal artery and out through the renal vein. Renal tubules are tiny tubes in the kidneys that remove waste from blood and make urine. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) starts in cells that line the renal tubules. RCC is the most common type of kidney cancer and is the focus of the book. Clear cell RCC and non-clear cell RCC are subtypes. h Almost any type of RCC can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Treatment for RCC is based on histology, tumor(s) size and location, and if cancer has metastasized to other areas in the body. 2 Diagnosing kidney cancer Test results General health tests Blood tests Urine tests Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Most kidney cancers are found by chance during imaging tests for other health problems. Further testing is used to confirm (diagnose) kidney cancer. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and possible biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too. Organize your medical documents, including insurance forms, medical records, and test results. Keep a list of contact information for your care team and update your primary care physician (PCP) regarding any changes. Include details about the specific type of cancer, treatment, and dates in your contact list. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support. These can be different people for different tasks or change over time. Consider bringing someone with you to doctor visits if possible or have someone on the phone or join you for telehealth visits. Ask your care team how best to communicate with them, especially in an emergency. For possible tests and procedures, see Guide
