Blood Lymphocytes Acute lymphoblastic leukemia About this book Key points Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fast-growing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. Lymphoblasts can crowd out other blood cells causing blood to not work as it should. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book is for those being treated at an adult cancer center. Blood Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout the body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. More than half of your blood is plasma. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (erythrocytes) White blood cells (leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, lymphocytes, and others Platelets (thrombocytes) Blood cells have important jobs. Red blood cells (RBCs) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs) fight infections. Platelets (PLTs) help control bleeding. Blood stem cells Bone marrow contains stem cells. A blood stem cell is an immature cell that can develop into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. Blood cells are being replaced in your body all the time. Many have a short lifespan. Some white blood cells live less than one day. Your body makes one million red blood cells every second! How blood cells are formed Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very immature to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. After a blood stem cell develops into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet, it is released in your bloodstream as needed. Blood stem cells can copy themselves or “selfrenew.” These cells are rare. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells ALL is thought to arise in lymphoid progenitor cells. Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. ALL affects the lymphoid progenitor cells, which develop into lymphocytes. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® (NCCN®). www.nccn.org Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell found in blood and lymph tissue, as well as all organs in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting lymphocytes of your immune system. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. Lymphoblasts can crowd out other blood cells causing blood to not work as it should. Acute leukemias grow faster than chronic leukemias. In general, to be diagnosed with ALL, 20 percent or more lymphoblasts must be present in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 marrow cells are lymphoblasts. In certain cases, a diagnosis of ALL is possible with less than lymphoblasts. ALL can be found in bone marrow, blood, and organs such as the testicles or the central nervous system. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. There are 2 types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL Within each type there are several subtypes, which are based mainly on: The type of lymphocyte (most often B cell or T cell) within the leukemia cells and how mature the cells are. This is known as the immunophenotype of the leukemia. If the leukemia cells have specific gene or chromosome changes. B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems. In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, T-LL, or T-LBL. About this book This book applies to AYAs and adults who are being treated for ALL at an adult cancer center. An adolescent and young adult (AYA) is someone 15 to 39 years of age at the time of initial cancer diagnosis. AYAs are a unique group that can be treated by pediatric or adult oncologists in pediatric or adult centers depending on the type of cancer. This book applies to those being treated at an adult cancer center. More information for AYAs seeking ALL treatment at a pediatric cancer center can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fast-growing blood cancer. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. This makes it hard for bone marrow or blood to do its work. To be diagnosed with ALL, 20 percent or more lymphoblasts must be present in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 marrow cells are lymphoblasts. h An adolescent and young adult (AYA) is someone 15 to 39 years of age at the time of initial cancer diagnosis. This book is for AYAs and adults being treated at an adult cancer center. There is more than one type of ALL. It is based on the type of lymphocyte, genetic mutations, and other features. Those with ALL should be treated at experienced cancer centers. Those with ALL should be treated at experienced cancer centers. 2 Testing for ALL Test results General health tests Blood tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy Tissue tests Genetic risk testing 19 Genetic and biomarker testing 22 Imaging tests 23 Lumbar puncture 24 Heart tests 25 Key points Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests and what to expect. Test results Results from blood and bone marrow tests and imaging studies will be used to determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about the specific type of cancer you have. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your Be prepared to have many blood tests. refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. Include in your contact list information on the exact type of cancer, as well as any treatment and the date it started. For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Guide 1 Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin.
