Colon cancer basics 5 6 6 The colon Polyps Key points Colon cancer is common and treatable. Many cancers that start in the colon can be cured, especially when found early. The colon The colon makes up most of the large intestine (bowel). In the colon water is absorbed from eaten food, turning it into feces or stool. After leaving the colon, stool moves into the rectum. The rectum is the last 6 inches or so of the large bowel. Stool is held here until it leaves the body through an opening called the anus. The colon The start of the colon is a pouch called the cecum. Sticking out from the cecum is the appendix. This skinny tube is about the size of a finger and is closed at one end. The rest of the colon has 4 main sections: the ascending, transverse, descending, and sigmoid colon. The term colorectal cancer is used to describe cancers that form in either the colon or rectum. While these cancers are similar, their treatment is different. The focus of this guide is colon cancer. For information on rectal cancer treatment, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Rectal Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Polyps Polyps are non-cancerous growths that form on the inner lining of the colon and rectum. The most common type is called an adenoma. While it may take many years, adenomas can become invasive colon cancer. Cancer that forms in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. This is the most common type of colon cancer. Polyps that rarely turn into cancer include hyperplastic and inflammatory polyps. While most polyps do not become cancer, almost all colon cancers start in a polyp. Removing polyps can prevent cancer before it starts. Most can be removed during a colonoscopy using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Polyps can also be tested to make sure that cancer has not already started to develop. For more information, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Colorectal Cancer Screening at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points This guide discusses the following key topics about colon cancer diagnosis and treatment. Testing and treatment planning h Testing the tumor for a biomarker (feature) called mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) h Treatment planning based on mismatch repair status and results of other testing Non-metastatic cancer Treatment for polyps with cancer Colectomy (surgery) for non-metastatic colon cancer Chemotherapy after colectomy (for all stage 3 cancers and some stage 2 cancers) Metastatic cancer h Expanded biomarker testing to identify targetable features of the cancer The use of local therapies to treat liver and lung tumors h Systemic therapy for metastatic cancer Survivorship Help for long-term side effects Maintaining healthy habits Resources 2 Testing and treatment planning Mismatch repair testing Family health history Blood tests Imaging Fertility and family planning Key points This chapter describes testing and other care needed to create your treatment plan. All colon cancers should be tested for mutations (changes) in genes that fix damaged DNA, called mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Most colon cancers are found during colonoscopy. It is common to have another colonoscopy to thoroughly examine the colon and look for other possible areas of cancer. This is called a diagnostic colonoscopy. Mismatch repair testing Mismatch repair (MMR) or microsatellite instability (MSI) testing is recommended for everyone diagnosed with colon cancer. This feature of some colon cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that help guide your treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for an inherited condition called Lynch syndrome, described next. Family health history Your doctor will ask about the health history of your biological (related by blood) family members. Those with a first-degree relative with colorectal cancer are more likely to have this cancer compared to the average person. Most colon cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a disorder that makes them more likely to get colon and other cancers. These are called inherited cancer syndromes. Two such conditions include Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). People born with Lynch syndrome are at high risk of developing colon, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations of the MMR genes. For cancers found to have the dMMR/MSI-H biomarker, testing for Lynch syndrome is recommended. FAP causes hundreds to thousands of polyps to form in the colon and rectum. The polyps start as benign growths, but over time can become invasive colon cancer. Cancer often develops by age 50 in people with classic FAP. A milder form (attenuated FAP) causes fewer polyps and usually starts later in life. If an inherited syndrome is suspected, your doctor will refer you to a genetic counselor. This expert can speak with you and your family about testing for syndromes related to colon cancer. To be tested, you must provide a sample of blood or saliva. A pathologist tests the sample for gene mutations that cause these syndromes. It is important to meet with a genetic counselor before having any genetic testing. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose colon cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. Complete blood count Cancer and other health problems can cause low or high blood cell counts. A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. White blood cells help the body to fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots. Chemistry profile Also known as a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), this group of tests provides information about how well your kidneys, liver, and other organs are working. CEA blood test Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a protein found in blood. The level of CEA is often higher than normal in people with colon cancer, especially if the cancer has spread to other organs. Monitoring CEA can be helpful even when the cancer is only in the colon and the level is normal, because the level will rise if the cancer later spreads to other organs. However, monitoring CEA is not helpful for everyone, even if the cancer has spread. People who are pregnant and those who smoke may have higher CEA levels. 66 I was diagnosed in the ER at age 44, 58 days after my wedding, and I faced biases and unexpected challenges. I had to fight to get care because I was dismissed for more than a year for so many different reasons. My journey taught me this: never give up, explore every reasonable option, and prioritize your mental health. Your life is the only one you have, so be true to yourself. Before any diagnosis, put on your life jacket first—take care of yourself. Get screened, know your family history. When facing colorectal cancer, the best care begins with self-care." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for people with earlystage colon cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic disease that may remain in the body after colectomy. This information may be helpful in predicting the risk of the cancer returning or other outcomes. But more information is needed, and at this time ctDNA testing is only recommended as part of a clinical trial. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. A radiologist interprets the images and conveys the results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your scans. If you get nervous in tight spaces, let them know. You may be offered a type of medicine called a sedative to help you relax. CT Computed tomography (CT) is the main imaging test used to see colon cancer in the body. During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine. You will be able to hear and speak with a technician at all times. A substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and mixed with a liquid to drink. You may feel flushed or get hives. Some people have an allergic reaction. Tell your doctor if you’ve had problems with contrast in the past. MRI Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not often used to plan treatment for colon cancer. Your doctor may order an MRI to get a better look at the liver or rectum, or if the CT scan results are unclear. Getting an MRI is much like getting a CT scan. In some cases, the area of the body being imaged is placed within a narrowed coil device that looks like a brace. It covers your body from below your chest to the top of your legs. It sends and receives radio waves. Straps may be used to help you stay in place. An MRI may cause your body to feel warm. If MRI is being used to better see cancer near the rectum, an enema may be needed. Or a gel may be inserted into the rectum beforehand. CT scan CT with contrast is the main imaging test used to determine the extent of colon cancer in the body. CT takes many pictures of the inside of the body using -rays. A computer combines the -rays to make one detailed picture. Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colon cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. If you are interested in potentially having children in the future, tell your care team. They will discuss any fertilityrelated risks of your treatment plan with you. Some methods for preserving (keeping) fertility before cancer treatment are described below. Your doctor may refer you for counseling about fertility preservation options. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. This is called egg freezing or oocyte cryopreservation. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mismatch repair testing All colon cancers should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). Testing for this biomarker involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Cancers that do not have these biomarkers are called microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). Family health history Inherited syndromes related to colon cancer include Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis. Everyone with colon cancer should be asked about their family health history. Blood tests A complete blood count (CBC), chemistry profile, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test are recommended as part of initial testing. Imaging CT with contrast is the main imaging test used to determine the extent of colon cancer in the body. Fertility and family planning Young adults diagnosed with colon cancer should be counseled about fertility related risks of treatment and options for preserving fertility. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 3 Treatment for non-metastatic cancer 14 Polyps with cancer Invasive cancer Chemotherapy after surgery Surveillance Key points Colon cancer often forms in polyps on the lining of the colon, but can also form as lesions. This chapter explains treatment for cancer that has not spread to areas far from the colon. Polyps with cancer A polyp is an overgrowth of cells on the inner lining of the colon wall. The most common type is called an adenoma. While it may take many years, adenomas can become invasive colon cancer. Cancer that starts in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. There are 2 main shapes of polyps. Pedunculated polyps are shaped like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. They have a stalk and round top. Sessile polyps are flatter and do not have a stalk. A polyp in which cancer has just started to grow is called a malignant (cancerous) polyp. Most polyps can be removed during a colonoscopy, using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Colon polyps Polyps are growths on the inner lining of the bowel wall. Some look like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. These are called pedunculated polyps. Others are flatter and do not have a stalk. These are called sessile polyps. Often, no further treatment is needed after a polypectomy. In other cases, surgery (resection) of a bigger piece of the colon is needed. This depends on: The size and shape of the polyp (pedunculated or sessile), The polypectomy results, and The results of testing the removed tissue. Before deciding whether resection is needed after a polypectomy, your doctor will review the results of testing with you and discuss your options. Invasive cancer For cancers not found early enough to be removed by polypectomy, colectomy (colon surgery) is needed. Surgery is only an option if the colon tumor can be completely removed. If you cannot have surgery first, see page Colectomy A colectomy is a surgery that removes the part of the colon with cancer. After the cancerous part is removed, the two healthy ends of the remaining colon are sewn or stapled together. At least 12 lymph nodes near the tumor will be removed and tested for cancer, in addition to any nodes that look abnormal to the surgeon. A colectomy can be done in two ways. The open method removes tumor tissue through a Colectomy Surgery for colon cancer is called colectomy. It involves removing the cancerous part of the colon. The two healthy ends of the remaining colon are then attached to each other. large cut in your abdomen. The minimally invasive method involves making a few small cuts. Tools are inserted through the cuts to see and remove part of your colon. The tissue removed during surgery is sent to a pathologist. The pathologist determines how far the cancer has grown within the colon wall. They also test the removed lymph nodes for cancer. These results are used to assign the cancer a stage. The stage helps determine whether you need chemotherapy after surgery. At the time of colectomy, some people may also have a procedure called a colostomy. This is done in cases where it may not be safe to reconnect the remaining sections of colon. In a colostomy, the remaining upper part of the colon is attached to an opening on the surface of the abdomen. This opening is called a stoma. Stool exits the body through the stoma and enters a bag attached to the skin. This is typically only needed for a short time. For colon cancer surgery, the colostomy can often be reversed with another operation. Colostomy is also known as diversion because it diverts (redirects) the flow of stool. Colostomy If the two healthy ends of the remaining colon cannot be safely reconnected after the cancer is removed, a colostomy may be performed. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening in your abdomen that allows stool to pass through. For colon cancer surgery, it is rare for a colostomy not to be reversed with another operation. Bowel blockage In rare cases, a tumor may grow so large that it blocks the flow of stool. There are several ways to deal with a blockage. One option is a colectomy that also unblocks the bowel. This is known as a one-stage colectomy. A second option is colectomy with colostomy. This is typically only needed for a short time. Another possibility is that a colostomy may be done first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. Lastly, in rare cases, a mesh metal tube called a stent may be placed first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. The stent keeps the colon open, allowing gas and stool to pass. Staging The cancer stage describes the extent of cancer in the body. Having a general idea of the structure of the colon wall is helpful for understanding how colon cancer is staged. The colon wall is made of layers of tissue. Cancer starts in the innermost layer that comes in contact with food. This layer is called the mucosa. The next layer is the submucosa. It is made of connective tissue and contains mucus glands, blood and lymph vessels, and nerves. The submucosa is followed by a layer of muscle called the muscularis propria. The outer, fourth layer is called serosa (or adventitia). If left untreated, cancer cells grow through the layers of the colon wall, towards the inside of the abdomen. The cancer can then invade structures or organs outside of the colon. 自 Your care team will give you information on: How to prepare for surgery What to expect during and after surgery Recovery Possible short- and long-term side effects of colectomy, including: Leaking from the spot where the colon was reconnected (anastomotic leak) Changes in bowel habits Bowel blocked by scar tissue Organs pushing through tissues or muscles weakened by surgery (hernia) Cancer cells can also break off from the colon tumor and travel through lymph or blood to nearby lymph nodes. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage colon cancer. In the AJCC system, the following key pieces of information about the cancer are used to give it a stage: T: How far the tumor has grown into or through the colon wall N: Whether any lymph nodes have cancer M: Whether the cancer has spread to areas or organs outside the colon (metastasized) The T, N, and M scores are combined to assign the cancer one of the following stages: 0, I (1), II (2), III (3), or IV (4). The stages are explained below. Stage 0 There are abnormal cells on the innermost layer of the colon wall. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into deeper layers of the colon wall. Stage 0 colon cancer is also called carcinoma in situ of the colon. Stage 1 The cancer has grown into either the second or third layer of the colon wall. There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes or in areas outside the colon. Stage 2 The cancer has grown into, or beyond, the fourth layer of the colon wall. There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes or in areas outside the colon. Stage 3 The cancer has spread from the colon to nearby lymph nodes or there are tumor deposits. Tumor deposits are small tumors in the fat around the colon. Stage 4 The cancer has spread to areas outside the colon and nearby lymph nodes. Colon cancer spreads most often to the liver and/or lungs. If you can’t have surgery first Having surgery first is not always an option. It may not be possible because of the location of the tumor, or because of other health problems. In this case, systemic therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy) is given first. Systemic therapy may also be given first for advanced cancers, or cancer that has spread to lymph nodes. If this approach is planned, chemotherapy is recommended for pMMR/MSS cancers. Immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor is preferred for dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Immunotherapy increases the activity of your immune system, improving your body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Checkpoint inhibitors recommended for use before colectomy in dMMR/MSI-H cancers include: Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) Nivolumab (Opdivo) with or without ipilimumab (Yervoy) Sometimes radiation therapy (alone or with chemotherapy) is given along with systemic therapy for unresectable cancers. For more information on the side effects of checkpoint inhibitors, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Chemotherapy after surgery Chemotherapy is the use of medicine to kill cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. Chemotherapy is usually given intravenously. This means the medicine is slowly infused into the bloodstream through a vein. It travels through the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 1 cancers. Stage 2 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 2A and 2B dMMR/MSI-H cancers, but may be given for some stage 2C dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Chemotherapy is recommended after colectomy for some stage 2 pMMR/MSS cancers. It is most helpful for cancers with a high risk of recurrence (returning after treatment). Your doctor will consider the features and risk factors of the cancer to determine if recurrence is likely. If chemotherapy is planned, recommended regimens include capecitabine and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)/leucovorin. These are given for 6 months. FOLFOX and CAPEOX are recommended options for high-risk cancers. FOLFOX is given for 6 months; CAPEOX for 3 months. Side effects Systemic therapy kills both cancer cells and healthy cells. The damage to healthy cells can cause hair loss, cracked skin, mouth sores, and other side effects. Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on supportive care is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Stage 3 Chemotherapy is recommended after colectomy for all stage 3 colon cancers. Preferred regimens include CAPEOX and FOLFOX. Other recommended options include capecitabine and 5-FU. Chemotherapy is typically given for 3 to 6 months. The length of treatment depends on the regimen and the risk of recurrence. Surveillance Follow-up testing is started when there are no signs of cancer after treatment. It can help find new cancer growth early. Stage 1 A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery for stage 1 cancers. If the results are normal, your next colonoscopy should be in 3 years, and then every 5 years. If a concerning or high-risk adenoma is found, your next colonoscopy will be needed within 1 year. If you don’t have any symptoms, other testing is not needed on a regular basis. Imaging tests may be ordered if your doctor thinks the cancer may have come back or spread. Stages 2 and 3 In addition to colonoscopy, surveillance for stages 2 and 3 colon cancer includes physical exams, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) blood tests, and CT scans. The recommended schedule for surveillance testing is shown in Guide In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. For more information, see Chapter 5: Survivorship.
