Lung cancer basics What is NSCLC? What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? What’s the best treatment? Key points If you’re reading this, you or someone you care for might have non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). It’s the most common type of lung cancer. In this chapter, you’ll learn what this type of cancer is and what it means if it’s early or locally advanced. What is NSCLC? Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a type of lung cancer. Another type of lung cancer is small cell lung cancer, but it is a different cancer covered in another book. Lung cancer cells grow out of control. They don’t die when they should and make many new cancer cells, which become tumors. Lung cancer cells also don’t stay in place. They can break away from a tumor, spread outside the lung, and form more tumors. NSCLC is a type of lung carcinoma Almost all lung cancers are carcinomas (karsin-OH-mas). Lung carcinomas form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways inside the lungs are the bronchi, bronchioli, and alveoli. NSCLC is the most common lung carcinoma. Other lung carcinomas are neuroendocrine tumors. Information on lung neuroendocrine tumors can be found at Airways of the lungs The air you breathe moves through a series of airways. It travels down your throat and through your windpipe (trachea). The windpipe splits into two airways called bronchi. Inside the lung, each bronchus divides into smaller airways called the bronchioli. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. Oxygen is transferred from air into the blood in the alveoli. NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. There are several types of NSCLC Each type of NSCLC forms from a particular kind of cell. Below are common types of NSCLC: Adenocarcinoma (A-deh-noh-KAR-sihNOH-muh) often forms from cells that line the alveoli and make mucus. This is the most common type of NSCLC. Large cell carcinoma forms from any of the large cells that are found throughout the airways. Squamous cell carcinoma (squaymous) forms from cells that line the bronchi. What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? Early and locally advanced lung cancers have not spread to the tissue lining around the lung or to other organs. The difference between early and locally advanced cancer is mainly based on the cancer stage. Cancer stages 1, 2, and 3 A cancer stage describes the extent of lung cancer in the body. The main stages of NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Early and Locally Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer 2024 Cancers that have spread to the lungs are not lung cancers. For example, stomach cancer that has spread to the lungs is still stomach cancer. lung cancer are often written with Roman numerals—stages I (1), II (2), III (3), and IV (4). We will be listing stages as 1, 2, 3, and 4 to make the stages easier to read. At diagnosis, stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3 cancers have grown from the airway into lung tissue. Some have spread to nearby diseasefighting structures called lymph nodes. Stage 1 is early NSCLC. In general, stage 2 and stage 3 are considered locally advanced. Cancer stages and metastasis Some early and locally advanced cancers spread to the tissue lining around the lung or to other organs after diagnosis and then are called metastatic cancer. Stage 4 cancer is metastatic cancer at the time of diagnosis. Information about metastatic NSCLC is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What’s the best treatment? There’s no single treatment for NSCLC that’s best for everyone. The best treatment is the treatment that’s right for you. The following chapters explain expert recommendations that are based on the latest research and current practices at leading cancer centers. Often, multiple treatments are used to get the best results Some people with early or locally advanced NSCLC have surgery to remove cancer from the body. Other types of cancer treatment are used with surgery to improve results. Read Chapter 5 to learn more about treatment with surgery. If you can’t have surgery, there are other good options. Some early cancers are treated with radiation therapy, which is explained in Chapter Other cancers are treated with 2 types of treatments called chemoradiation. Chemoradiation is discussed in Chapter Supportive care addresses the challenges of cancer Supportive care has been shown to extend and enhance life for people with lung cancer. Tell your care team about your symptoms and other needs to get the best supportive care for you. More information on supportive care can be found throughout this book. Clinical trials offer hope to all people with lung cancer Clinical trials are a type of health research that tests new ways of fighting cancer. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial that is a good fit for you. Learn more about clinical trials in Chapter Advocate for yourself You are an important member of your cancer care team. Discuss the recommendations in this book with your team. Together, you can make a care plan that’s best for you. There is a list of suggested questions in Chapter 9 to ask your team. You’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making decisions with your team. Key points Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a cancer of lung cells. Cancers that spread to the lungs are not lung cancer. Early and locally advanced NSCLCs are cancers that have grown from the airways into lung tissue, and some have spread to lymph nodes. Treatment for NSCLC varies based on what is best for each person. When possible, surgery is used for primary treatment. 2 Lung nodules Lung nodule experts Risk for lung cancer Signs of lung cancer Planning follow-up care Types of follow-up care Follow-up of solid nodules Follow-up of subsolid nodules Planning to remove tissue Removing samples for cancer testing Confirming lung cancer Key points Many people have small masses of tissue in their lungs, called nodules. A nodule may have been found in your lung by chance. This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are. Nodules can be caused by cancer, infections, scar tissue, and other health conditions. When a nodule found by chance seems to be cancer, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course of care. Your care team should consist of members from different fields of medicine, including the following board-certified experts: h A pulmonologist is a doctor who’s an expert in lung diseases. A thoracic radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in imaging of the chest. Imaging takes pictures of the inside of the body. h A thoracic surgeon is a doctor who is an expert in operations within the chest. To decide if a nodule is cancer, your team will do the following: Assess your risk for lung cancer. Review lung images and request more imaging if there may be cancer. Perform a procedure called a biopsy, if needed. Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer. When nodules are found by imaging, you may receive more scans to assess if the nodule is cancer. If the nodule is unlikely cancer, your team may refer you for lung cancer screening. Lung cancer screening is for people at high risk for lung cancer. Information on lung cancer screening is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Risk for lung cancer Anyone can get lung cancer, but some people are more at risk. A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of lung cancer. Risk factors for lung cancer are listed in Guide Some people with many risk factors never get lung cancer. Some people with no risk factors do get lung cancer. Experts are still learning why one person gets lung cancer and another does not. Tobacco smoke The biggest risk factor for lung cancer is smoking tobacco. There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide
