Breast cancer basics The breast Ductal carcinoma in situ Key points Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is found in the cells that line the ducts in the breast. DCIS is stage 0 or noninvasive cancer. This means the cancerous cells are in place (in situ) and have not spread outside the ducts. DCIS is treated to prevent invasive breast cancer, a more advanced form of cancer. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest. The breast is made of milk ducts, fat, nerves, lymph and blood vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Behind the breast is the pectoral (chest) muscle and ribs. Muscle and ligaments help hold the breast in place. Breast tissue contains glands that can make milk. These milk glands are called lobules. Lobules look like tiny clusters of grapes. Small tubes called ducts connect the lobules to the nipple. The ring of darker breast skin is called the areola. The raised tip within the areola is called the nipple. The nipple-areola complex (NAC) is a term that refers to both parts. The breast The breast is a glandular organ made up of milk ducts, fat, nerves, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Lymph fluid drains from breast tissue into lymph vessels and travels to lymph nodes near your armpit (axilla). Lymphatic fluid is a clear fluid that gives cells water and food. It also helps to fight germs. Nodes near the armpit are called axillary lymph nodes (ALNs). Ductal carcinoma in situ Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) or intraductal carcinoma is found in the cells that line the ducts. Ducts are thin tubes that carry milk in the breast. DCIS is noninvasive cancer. Noninvasive means the cancerous cells are in place (in situ) and have not spread anywhere else. DCIS is a preinvasive disease. DCIS is treated to prevent invasive breast cancer, a more advanced form of cancer. Invasive breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands (lobules) into the surrounding breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. DCIS Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is found in the cells that line the thin tubes (ducts) that carry milk to the breast. The cancerous cells are in place (in situ) and have not spread. Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS) Key points h Anyone can develop breast cancer. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Cancerous cells found only inside the ducts or lobules is called noninvasive. Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is found only in the ducts. Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple x-rays will be taken. A computer combines the x-rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days. Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammogram or 3-dimensional (3D) mammogram known as tomosynthesis. 2 Testing for DCIS Test results General health tests Physical exam Imaging tests Biopsy Estrogen receptor status Genetic cancer risk testing Cancer stages Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer you have, as well as any treatments you've received and the date each treatment started. Set up a MyChart or health record account if it’s available, which can help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. Test results Results from biopsy and imaging studies will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Keep these things in mind: For possible tests, see Guide Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about the specific type of cancer you have. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer.
