Mouth cancer basics The mouth Head and neck cancer Mouth cancer Key points Mouth or oral cavity cancer is a type of cancer that affects the lips, the front two-thirds of the tongue, the gums, the lining inside the cheeks and lips, the floor (bottom) of the mouth under the tongue, the hard palate (bony top of the mouth), the bony ridges that hold the sockets of the teeth, and the small area of the gum behind the wisdom teeth. The mouth, or oral cavity, is the first part of the digestive and respiratory (breathing) systems. The lips, cheeks, palate, teeth, and tongue make up the mouth. The mouth helps us breathe, talk, chew, taste, swallow, eat, and drink. The cheeks and lips hold food in the mouth and help to form and sound words. Parts of the mouth The 2 main functions of the mouth are eating and speaking. The mouth is also known as the oral cavity or the buccal cavity. Some important structures of the mouth: Hard palate is the hard, bony part of the roof of the mouth. The mouth Tongue is a muscular organ in your mouth that aids in chewing, speaking, and breathing. Lips surround the opening of the mouth. Buccal (oral) mucosa is the lining inside the cheeks and inside where the lips touch the teeth. Alveolar ridge is the bony, raised area of the upper (maxilla) and lower (mandible) jaw that holds the sockets of the teeth. Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth. Oral mucosa The oral mucosa is the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth and lips. It is made up of 2 layers. Epithelium – The surface layer containing stratified squamous cells, which are thin, flat cells. Lamina propria – The bottom layer of connective tissue. A tumor can grow through the layers of the oral mucosa. A measure of how deep the tumor has grown is called depth of invasion (DOI). Depending on the region of the mouth, the epithelium may be nonkeratinized or keratinized. Nonkeratinized squamous epithelium covers the soft palate, inner lips, inner cheeks, the floor of the mouth, and area underneath the tongue. Keratinized squamous epithelium is present on rough surfaces caused by chewing such as the gums (gingiva) and hard palate as well as the top of the tongue. Head and neck cancer Head and neck cancer is a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat near the voice box (hypopharynx). More information on nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) and throat (oropharyngeal) cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancers to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. Mouth cancer Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is also called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer. Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped into a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth. Normally, these are thin, flat cells and are similar to the top layer of skin and surface lining some other parts of the body such as the lungs and esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of mouth cancer and is the focus of this book. Mouth cancer can develop in the parts that make up the mouth such as: Lips (mucosal lip) Gums (gingiva) Lining inside the cheeks and lips (buccal mucosa) Front two-thirds of the tongue Roof of the mouth (hard palate) Bony, raised areas that hold the teeth sockets (alveolar ridge) h Floor of the mouth (under the tongue) Small area of the gum behind the wisdom teeth (retromolar trigone) Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the vermilion lip is not included in this book. The vermillion lip is the area where the skin and the lip meet on the outside of the mouth. Information for treatment of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the vermilion lip can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Squamous Cell Skin Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mouth cancer refers to cancer that develops in any of the parts that make up the mouth (oral cavity). Mouth cancer is a type of head and neck cancer. Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer treatment is based on the tumor location and cancer stage. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of mouth cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucous membranes of the mouth. SCC is the focus of this book. Mouth cancer Mouth or oral cancer can develop in the lips (mucosal lip), the lining inside the cheeks and lips (buccal mucosa), the front two-thirds of the tongue, the upper and lower gums (gingiva), the floor of the mouth under the tongue, the bony roof of the mouth (hard palate), and the small area behind the wisdom teeth (retromolar trigone). 2 Testing for mouth cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy will be used to determine your cancer stage treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about the specific type of cancer you have. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are Take care of yourself. This is a stressful time. Seek out support groups at your local hospital, through social media, or from those listed in the back of this book. Look to friends, relatives, neighbors, and coworkers for social support. encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer you have, as well as any treatments you've received and the date each treatment started. Set up a “MyChart” or health record account if it’s available, which will help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history In general, head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. Biopsy As needed: • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • CT with contrast and/or MRI with and without contrast of primary tumor and neck • FDG-PET/CT • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Dental exam with x-ray (Panorex) or CT without contrast • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Tobacco and alcohol use history Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works. It can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Complete head and neck exam A physical exam will include the head and neck. Since some parts of the mouth and throat are not easy to see when you open your mouth, a health care provider might feel (palpate) your oral cavity and use a special mirror or fiberoptic scope to look at these areas. Dental exam It is important to tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and to have regular dental cleanings and checkups. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietitian can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily self-care tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist to discuss the options before starting treatment. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t really sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests show the primary tumor, or where the cancer started, and look for cancer in other parts of the body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting imaging tests, will write a report and send this report to your health care provider (HCP). It is likely that the report will be sent directly to you through your patient portal or patient access system. You should discuss these results with your HCP. You will not have all of the following tests. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave your body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. A CT scan of your head, neck, and chest, may be one of the tests to look for cancer. In most cases, contrast will be used. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist if you have any metal in your body. During the test, you will likely be asked to hold your breath for 10 to 20 seconds as the technician collects the images. Contrast is often used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, base of the tongue or tonsil lymphoid tissue, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, an ultrasound or CT is used to guide a biopsy. Panoramic dental x-ray A panoramic dental -ray or panoramic x-ray (Panorex) uses a very small dose of radiation to capture the entire mouth in one image, including the teeth, upper and lower jaws, and surrounding structures and tissues. It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit A history of smoking or vaping nicotine increases your chances of developing head and neck, lung, and other cancers. Smoking and vaping can limit how well cancer treatment works and prevent wound healing. They also greatly increase your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. Cannabis use might also affect the amount of anesthesia used during surgery. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking and vaping. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke or vape. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke or vape, ask your care team about counseling and medicines to help you quit. In head and neck cancers, stopping smoking or vaping is essential to maximize the chance for cure and minimize side effects. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Biopsy A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid. Samples removed during a biopsy or surgery will be sent to a pathologist, an expert in examining cells using a microscope (called cytology) to confirm the presence of cancer. The pathologist will determine the cancer subtype called tumor histology. A fine-needle aspiration (FNA), fine needle biopsy (FNB), and core needle biopsy (CNB) use needles of different sizes to remove a sample of tumor or lymph node. An ultrasound or CT scan might be used to guide a lymph node biopsy. Biopsy of metastasis Metastasis is the spread of cancer to an area of the body such as lymph nodes or lung. A biopsy of the metastasis may be needed to confirm the presence of cancer. If there is more than one metastasis, each site may be biopsied. The type of biopsy used depends on the location of the suspected metastases and other factors. Biomarker testing Inside our cells are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information may be helpful when choosing the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. These tests are generally used in advanced or widely spread (metastatic) cancers. However, in comparison to other cancers, molecular testing has limited value in the treatment of mouth cancers since there are few drugs that specifically target the genetic mutations causing mouth cancers to grow and spread. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. If you feel something different around your neck, glands, tongue, or mouth area, please don’t wait! Go see an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctor.” Key points Results from imaging studies and biopsy may help determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. In some cases, a sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins might be targeted with specific therapies. Smoking or heavy alcohol use will affect your treatment outcomes and increase treatment toxicity. It is strongly recommended you seek help to stop smoking or vaping. 自 We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer. Take our survey to let us know what we got right and what we could do better. NCCN.org/patients/feedback 3 Mouth cancer staging How mouth cancer is staged TNM scores Mouth cancer stages Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. This chapter explains mouth cancer stages. How mouth cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage. Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes or mutations that might suggest treatment? Staging is based on a combination of information to reach a final numbered stage. Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM. The prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic. Cancer staging is often done twice, before and after surgery. Staging after surgery provides more specific and accurate details about the size of the cancer and lymph node status. Clinical stage Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is based on a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. An example might look like cN1 or cMIn mouth cancer, the clinical stage is based on imaging and biopsy results. These tests are done before any treatment as part of an initial diagnosis. Pathologic stage Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery. An example might be pNIf you are given cancer drug therapy before surgery, then the stage might add a "y" and look like ypT Anyone can give up; It’s the easiest thing in the world to do, but to hold it together when everyone would expect for you to fall apart, now that is true strength.” Lymph nodes in the head and neck There are over 300 lymph nodes in the head and neck. Most tumors spread to nearby lymph nodes. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage mouth cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on imaging and pathology results, a score or number is assigned to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage. A TNM example might look like this: T1N0M0 or T1, N0, M T (tumor) – Depth and size of the main (primary) tumor and if the tumor has grown into nearby tissue (tumor extension). N (node) – If cancer has spread to nearby (regional) lymph nodes M (metastasis) -– If cancer has spread to distant parts of the body or metastasized Locoregional or locally advanced – This refers to a tumor that has spread to tissue, organs, or lymph nodes near the mouth. Moderately or very advanced disease – This includes cancer that has spread to parts of the neck such as the bones and muscles of the jaw, sinuses, or skin. It might include cancer in the base of the skull or carotid artery. Metastatic – This is cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, including lung and distant lymph nodes. This might be referred to as very advanced disease. Not all stage 4 cancers are metastatic. Your preferences about treatment are always important. Talk to your care team and make your wishes known. Numbered stages Numbered stages are based on TNM scores. Stages range from stage 0 to stage 4, with 4 being the most advanced. They might also be written as stage 0, stage I, stage II, stage III, and stage IV. Other terms might be used instead of numbered cancer stages. Resectable – Tumor can be removed completely with surgery. Unresectable – Tumor cannot be removed completely with surgery. The tumor might involve major vessels or other normal critical structures making it unsafe to remove. Mouth cancer stages The following TNM staging information is used for squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the mouth including mucosa of the lip. These are tumors that start in the surface (epithelium), which lines the inside of the mouth. The epithelial layer is made up of squamous cells. See Guide Tumor A tumor can grow into nearby structures. Tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). A golf ball is 4 cm and a pea is 1 cm . Depth of invasion (DOI) is a measure of how deep the tumor has grown into the layers of tissue, not tumor thickness. Imaging scans such as an MRI can be used to calculate DOI. As depth of invasion increases, the risk of regional lymph node metastases also increases. Tis – This is carcinoma in situ, meaning that cancerous cells are found only in the squamous cell layer. T1 – Tumor is 2 cm or less with DOI of 5 mm or less. T2 – Tumor is 2 cm or less with DOI of more than 5 mm or tumor is between 2 cm and 4 cm with DOI of or less. T3 – Tumor is between 2 cm and 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor is larger than 4 cm with DOI of or less. T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive .
