Throat cancer basics The throat The pharynx Head and neck cancers Throat cancer Key points The throat is located in the back of the mouth and in the neck. Cancer can form in part of the throat called the oropharynx. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and the base of the tongue. The throat The throat is a hollow, muscular tube inside the neck that starts behind the nose and ends at the top of the trachea (windpipe) and esophagus (the tube that goes to the stomach). The throat acts as a passageway for air to enter the lungs and food and liquid to enter the esophagus. It contains many structures, including the tonsils, pharynx, and larynx. Some important structures of the throat and mouth: Oral cavity is another name for mouth. Hard palate is the hard, front part of the roof of the mouth behind the teeth. Soft palate is the soft, back part of the roof of the mouth. Tongue includes several muscles that extend from your hyoid bone (located in the middle of your neck) to the floor of your mouth. Pharynx is the throat. Larynx is a specific part of the throat also known as the voice box. Esophagus is a hollow muscular tube that carries food and liquid to the stomach. Trachea or windpipe leads to the lungs. The pharynx The pharynx is part of the throat and starts behind the nose (nasal cavity) and opens into the larynx and esophagus. The pharynx (said fair-inks) has 3 parts: Nasopharynx Oropharynx Hypopharynx Cancer can be found in any part of the pharynx. This book will focus on cancer of the oropharynx and will refer to the oropharynx as the throat. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of the throat, and the base of the tongue found in the throat. PartsoftheOropharynx The oropharynx The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of the throat, and the back (base) of the tongue. This book will refer to the oropharynx as the throat. The pharynx The pharynx is a hollow, muscular tube inside the neck that starts behind the nose and opens into the larynx and esophagus. The pharynx has 3 parts: the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx. Anatomyof thePharynx Head and neck cancers Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the: Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat behind the larynx (hypopharynx). Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN or HNSCC) is the most common type of head and neck cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the mouth (oral), nose (nasal), and throat (pharynx). Mucus is a thick, slippery fluid. Squamous cells are found throughout the body, including the skin. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancer to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. More information on mouth cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer Throat cancer starts in the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of throat cancer and is the focus of this book. Cancer cells form a tumor called a primary tumor within the area of the oropharynx. This area includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and base of the tongue. Tumors can grow into nearby tissue and organs, such as the voice box (larynx). Cancer cells often spread to lymph nodes in the neck, and less frequently, the lungs, liver, or spine. Key points Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN or HNSCC) forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the mouth (oral), nose (nasal), and throat (pharynx). Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). SCC of the throat (oropharynx) is the focus of this book. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and base of the tongue found in the throat. 2 Testing for throat cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment p16 (HPV) testing Imaging tests Scoping procedures Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and a biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about the specific type of cancer you have. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer, as well as any treatments and the date each treatment started. For possible tests, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Biopsy of main tumor with human papillomavirus (HPV) testing by p16 Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. CT scan with contrast and/or MRI with or without contast of main tumor and neck As needed: • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Pre-anesthesia exam • FDG-PET/CT • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • Dental exam and x-ray (Panorex) • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B Tobacco and alcohol use history Dental exam Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works.Their use can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns. Physical exam Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. During a physical exam, your health care provider may: It is important to tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and to have regular dental cleanings and checkups. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. If you need any dental work or procedures, they might be recommended before starting certain treatment. Complete head and neck exam A physical exam will include the head and neck. Since the oropharynx is found inside the throat, some parts are not easy to see when your mouth is open. A doctor might use a special mirror or fiberoptic scope passed through your mouth or nose to look at these areas. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer, and your feelings can change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Hepatitis B and hepatitis C screening Hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are types of liver disease caused by a virus. A hepatitis blood test will tell your treatment team if you had hepatitis in the past or if you have it today. Some cancer treatments can wake up (or reactivate) the virus. If this happens, it can cause harm to the liver. Lung function tests Lung function tests or pulmonary function tests (PFTs) measure how well the lungs work. They measure how much air the lungs can hold and how quickly air is moved into and out of the lungs. They also measure how much oxygen is used and how much carbon dioxide is given off during breathing. Nutrition assessment You should meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. During and after treatment, your treatment team will monitor you for weight loss and other signs you aren’t receiving enough nutrition. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit A history of smoking or vaping nicotine increases your chances of developing head and neck, lung, and other cancers. Smoking and vaping can limit how well cancer treatment works and prevent wound healing. They also greatly increase your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. Cannabis use might also affect the amount of anesthesia used during surgery. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking and vaping. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke or vape. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke or vape, ask your care team about counseling and medicines to help you quit. In head and neck cancers, stopping smoking or vaping is essential to maximize the chance for cure and minimize side effects. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily self-care tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. The ECOG PS scores range from 0 to PS 0 means the person is fully active. PS 1 means the person is still able to perform light to moderate activity, but with some limitations. PS 2 means the person is limited to the chair or bed less than half of the time and is still able to care for self. PS 3 means the person is limited to the chair or bed more than half of the time. PS 4 means the person is totally confined to the bed or chair and completely unable to care for self. PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor. Good PS is usually PS 0 or PS Pre-anesthesia exam Anesthesia is loss of feeling or awareness caused by drugs. It keeps you from feeling pain from surgery or other procedures. A pre-anesthesia assessment will be done by the anesthesiologist. It will include a physical exam of your throat and airway. You be asked questions about your medical history, past surgery experiences, if you have any allergies to drugs or medicines, your understanding of the procedure, and how your appearance and function might change. Head and neck cancer surgery is complex. It is further complicated by other health conditions, airway and swallowing issues, tobacco and alcohol use, and tumor location. Being prepared and knowing what to expect after surgery will help prevent severe complications. Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist to discuss the options before starting treatment. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t really sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. p16 (HPV) testing For throat cancer, biopsy samples are tested for the p16 protein to see if human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is present. This is a key part of staging (finding out if and how much the cancer has spread) and expected treatment results, and is considered when making treatment decisions. Cancers that are linked to HPV tend to respond better to treatment. p16 testing is different than HPV testing. p16 is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection because p16 usually increases in cancer cells when HPV is present. HPV Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities, such as the cervix, vagina, vulva, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer. HPV is the main cause of squamous cell carcinomas of the throat (oropharynx), particularly cancers of the tonsils and base of the tongue. HPV type 16 is responsible for 9 out of 10 throat cancers. The remaining cancers are caused by HPV18, 33, and HPV-positive throat cancer is a distinct disease with specific tumor features that can be targeted during treatment. p16 HPV16 is detected using a test to look for p is a protein that slows cell division. It is produced by a gene located on chromosome 9 (shown as 9p3). Human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes or 46 chromosomes in total. Testing to look for the presence (expression) of p16 is called biomarker testing. p16 can be found in cancers such as throat, cervical, vulvar, melanoma, and esophageal. When too much (overexpression) of p16 is found in throat cancer, it means that the cancer is usually caused by HPV. It might be written as , , , or p16 (HPV)-positive. However, cancer can be p16-. This might be written as p . Your preferences about treatment are always important. Talk to your care team and make your wishes known. Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests show the primary tumor, or where the cancer started, and look for cancer in other parts of the body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting imaging tests, will write a report and send this report to your health care provider (HCP). It is likely that the report will be sent directly to you through your patient portal or patient access system. You should discuss these results with your HCP. Some imaging tests are described next. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. A CT scan of your neck and chest may be one of the tests to look for cancer. In most cases, contrast will be used. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays and there is no radiation exposure. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist if you have any metal in your body. During the test, you will likely be asked to hold your breath for 10 to 20 seconds as the technician collects the images. Contrast is often used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive sugar-based substance called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help identify cancer in primary sites, lymph nodes, and/or distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that may be in lymph nodes. Sometimes, an ultrasound or CT is used to guide a fine-needle biopsy (FNB). Keep these things in mind Take care of yourself. This is a stressful time. Seek out and ask for support. Support can be a friend, relative, neighbor, or coworker. This will be a confusing time. You will hear a lot of unfamiliar words. Interact with your health care team, ask questions, and talk about how you feel. Panoramic dental x-ray A panoramic dental x-ray or panoramic x-ray (Panorex) uses a very small dose of radiation to capture the entire mouth in one image, including the teeth, upper and lower jaw, and surrounding structures and tissues. It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. Scoping procedures Some imaging tests use a thin, tube-shaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose body to examine the oropharynx and to take pictures. One end of the scope has a small light and camera lens to see inside your body. The image is sent to a television or computer monitor. This will also help guide your doctor in performing a biopsy. More than one type of scope may be used for imaging tests. The type of scope often used for head and cancer is called an endoscope. An endoscope is often guided into the body through the mouth or nose. Endoscopy might be used to determine the size and spread of tumor and to take a tumor sample. Before an endoscopy, you will be given a topical spray to numb the throat. Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures. It is done while you are awake with a topical spray to make you more comfortable. Laryngoscopy and nasolaryngoscopy Laryngoscopy is an exam of the back of your throat, including your voice box (larynx) or behind your voice box (hypopharynx). It uses a laryngoscope, which is a thin, long tube fitted with a fiberoptic light. Your voice box contains your vocal cords and allows you to speak. A laryngoscope is used to look for tumors in the throat and voice box (larynx) and hypopharynx. Laryngoscopy may be done in different ways: Indirect laryngoscopy uses a small mirror held at the back of your throat. The doctor shines a light on the mirror to view the throat area. Medicine to numb the back of your throat may be used. Fiberoptic laryngoscopy (nasolaryngoscopy) uses a small flexible scope passed through your nose and into your throat. Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute. Direct laryngoscopy is a more detailed exam performed under general anesthesia in an operating room. It uses a scope called a laryngoscope placed in the back of your throat. This procedure allows the doctor to see deeper in the throat and to take a tissue sample for a biopsy. The purpose of direct laryngoscopy is to identify the primary (main) tumor and determine if it is resectable (can be removed with surgery). Esophagoscopy In an esophagoscopy, a device is guided down the throat into the esophagus. It is performed under anesthesia in an operating room. This allows the doctor to examine your esophagus (swallowing tube) for abnormal growths. Bronchoscopy During a bronchoscopy, a device is inserted through the nose or mouth to examine the inside of your airway, including the trachea and bronchi. Bronchoscopy may be used to detect cancer or to perform some treatment procedures. It is done under anesthesia to make you more comfortable. Panendoscopy During a panendoscopy, different types of endoscopes are passed down the mouth or nose to do a laryngoscopy, pharyngoscopy, esophagoscopy, or bronchoscopy. This allows a doctor to thoroughly examine the mouth, oropharynx, larynx (voice box), esophagus (tube leading to the stomach), and trachea (windpipe) and bronchi (breathing passages in the lungs). It is performed under anesthesia to make you more comfortable. This procedure might be done to look for other tumors if it is unclear where the cancer started, or if the lymph nodes in the bottom part of the neck seem abnormal. A biopsy of any tumors or other abnormal areas might be taken. Biopsies can be done with special tools that are used through the scopes. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! Biopsy A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid. Samples removed during a biopsy or surgery will be sent to a pathologist, an expert in examining cells using a microscope (called cytology) to confirm the presence of cancer. The pathologist will determine the cancer subtype called tumor histology. A fine-needle aspiration (FNA), fine-needle biopsy (FNB), and core needle biopsy (CNB) use needles of different sizes to remove a sample of tumor or lymph node. An ultrasound (US) or CT scan might be used to guide a lymph node biopsy. Biopsy of metastasis Metastasis is the spread of cancer to an area of the body such as lymph nodes or lung. A biopsy of the metastasis may be needed to confirm the presence of cancer. If there is more than one metastasis, each site may be biopsied. The type of biopsy used depends on the location of the suspected metastases and other factors. Biomarker testing Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or have immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself. Tumor p16 (HPV) testing HPV testing by p16 is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. It is used to learn more information about your cancer. Testing will be done on a biopsy of your tumor from either your throat, a lymph node, or other sites in your body if needed. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. Cell-free DNA testing Cell-free or circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing uses a sample of blood to look for cancer cells or for pieces of DNA from tumor cells. Although this test is not a recommended standard and its use has not been agreed upon, many providers use it to monitor treatment response and for cancer recurrence. Key points Results from imaging studies and a biopsy will determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Your overall health may guide the best treatment for your cancer. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. An exam of the throat (pharynx) may sometimes involve the use of a thin, tubeshaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. A sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 3 Throat cancer staging How throat cancer is staged TNM scores p16- (HPV-) cancer stages cancer stages Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Testing for p16 (HPV) is an important part of staging. This chapter explains throat cancer stages. How throat cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Cancer staging is not the same for all cancer types and locations. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage. Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Grade of the cancer (G): How much do the cancer cells look like normal cells? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes, proteins such as p16, or mutations that might suggest treatment? Staging is based on a combination of information to reach a final numbered stage. Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM plus tumor grade. The prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic. Cancer staging is often done twice, before and after surgery. Staging after surgery provides more specific and accurate details about the size of the cancer and lymph node status. Clinical stage Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is based on a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. An example might look like cN2 or cMIn throat cancer, the clinical (before surgery) stage is based on imaging results. These tests are done before any treatment as part of an initial diagnosis. Surgery is needed to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Pathologic stage Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery. An example might be pNIf you are given a cancer drug therapy before surgery, then the stage might add a "y" and look like ypTThe pathologic (after surgery) stage is based on information gained after surgery to remove all or part of the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. This gives a more accurate picture of how far the cancer has spread and is used to determine your treatment options after surgery. The removal of tumor tissue and nearby lymph nodes is an important part of pathologic staging. Lymph nodes in the head and neck There are over 300 lymph nodes in the head and neck. Most throat tumors spread to nearby lymph nodes. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage throat cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on imaging and pathology results, a score or number is assigned to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage. A TNM example might look like this: T1N0M0 or T1, N0, M T (tumor) – Depth and size of the main (primary) tumor N (node) – If cancer has spread to nearby (regional) lymph nodes M (metastasis) – If cancer has spread to distant parts of the body or metastasized Throat cancer stages are based on if the cancer is p16-positive or p16-negative (p16-). A p cancer is one that is HPVrelated (HPV-mediated). Numbered stages Numbered stages are based on TNM scores. Stages range from stage 0 to stage 4, with 4 being the most advanced. They might be written as stage 0, stage I, stage II, stage III, and stage IV. Other terms might be used instead of numbered cancer stages. Resectable – Tumor can be removed completely with surgery. Unresectable – Tumor cannot be removed completely with surgery. The tumor might involve nearby veins and arteries or other structures making it unsafe to remove. Locoregional or locally advanced – This refers to a tumor that has spread to tissue, organs, or lymph nodes in the head and neck. Moderately or very advanced disease – Cancer that has spread to parts of the neck such as the base of the skull, larynx, pharynx, bones and muscles behind the nasal cavity, jaw, and roof of the mouth. It might include cancer in the carotid artery. Metastatic – Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, including lung and distant lymph nodes. This might be referred to as very advanced disease. Not all stage 4 cancers are metastatic. p16- (HPV-) cancer stages p16- throat cancer starts in the oropharynx and is not caused by human papillomavirus (HPV). The following TNM staging information is used for squamous cell carcinoma that tested negative for p16 or was not tested. For p16- (HPV-) cancer stages, see Guide Tumor A tumor can grow into nearby structures. Head and neck tumors are measured in centimeters (cm). A baseball is 7 cm, a golf ball is 4 cm, and a pea is 1 cm. Tis – Carcinoma in situ T1 – Tumor is 2 cm or smaller T2 – Tumor is between 2 and 4 cm T3 – Tumor is larger than 4 cm or has grown in to the epiglottis flap that closes the airway to the trachea) T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor invades the larynx, extrinsic muscle of tongue, medial pterygoid, hard palate, or mandible. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor invades lateral pterygoid muscle, pterygoid plates, lateral nasopharynx, or skull base or encases carotid artery.
