About CML 5 What is CML? 7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Philadelphia chromosome Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. Often, in CML the very immature or most immature cells (myeloblasts or lymphoblasts) are referred to simply as blasts. CML is thought to arise from blood stem cells that make an increased amount of myeloid progenitor cells. However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells. It is not passed down from birth parents to children. The BCR::ABL1 gene makes a new protein that leads to uncontrolled blood cell growth. This growth ultimately leads to CML. Treatment for CML aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL1 protein. Those with CML should be treated at centers experienced in this type of cancer. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. Consider seeking the opinion of a CML specialist. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! This book is organized into chapters on: Testing Treatment CML phases 2 Tests Test results General health tests Blood tests Fertility (all genders) Performance status Bone marrow tests Testing for CML biomarker and genetic changes Heart tests Key points Questions to ask Treatment planning starts with testing. Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat CML. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Organize your medical documents, including insurance forms, medical records, and test results. Keep a list of contact information for your care team and update your primary care physician (PCP) regarding any changes. Include details about the specific type of cancer, treatment, and dates on your contact list. Ask your care team how best to communicate with them, especially in an emergency. Test results Results from blood tests and possible biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support. These can be different people for different tasks or change over time. Consider bringing someone with you to doctor visits if possible, or have someone on the phone or join you for telehealth visits. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too. Tests used to diagnose CML can be found in Guide
