Stomach cancer basics The stomach Parts of the stomach Stomach wall Stomach cancer How stomach cancer spreads Key points The stomach is a large, hollow organ that secretes enzymes and acid to aid in the digestion of food. It is part of the digestive system. The digestive system takes in food, breaks it down, absorbs the nutrients, and removes waste from the body. intestine at a time, the stomach also serves as a temporary holding chamber. The large intestine prepares unused food to be moved out of the body. There is not much activity where the stomach connects to the esophagus and small intestine. However, the main body of the stomach is very active during digestion. The stomach The stomach is a muscular, hollow organ located between the esophagus and the small intestine. It secretes enzymes and acid that convert what you eat and drink into a liquid called chyme. When empty, your stomach is about 10 to 12 inches in size. The stomach is part of the digestive system. The digestive system takes in and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes organs like your liver, gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, and intestines. The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. It includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, and rectum. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. Stomach contractions along with enzymes and acid break down food into chyme. From the stomach, chyme enters the small intestine where nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream. Since only small amounts of chyme are released into the small The digestive system The digestive system takes in and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes organs like your liver, gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, and intestines. Parts of the stomach The parts of the stomach include: Cardia – the opening where the esophagus connects to the stomach. Fundus – the upper part of the stomach, which forms a bulge higher than the opening of the esophagus (farthest from the pylorus). It stores undigested food and gases released from digestion. Body – the main part of the stomach. Antrum – the lower portion of the stomach where food mixes with enzymes and acid. Pylorus – connects the stomach to the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The pylorus is a valve that opens and closes during digestion. This allows partly digested food and other stomach contents to pass from the stomach to the small intestine. The esophagus joins the stomach just below the diaphragm at the esophagogastric junction (EGJ). The diaphragm is the thin breathing muscle below the lungs and heart that separates the chest from the abdomen. The EGJ might be referred to as the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). Parts of the stomach The parts of the stomach include the cardia, the fundus, the body, the antrum, and the pylorus. The stomach is part of the digestive system. Many lymph nodes can be found along the lesser and greater curvatures of the stomach. Stomach wall The stomach is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are layers of muscle and connective tissue. The wall of the stomach is made of 5 main layers. Mucosa – Inner membrane that is in contact with food. It consists of 3 layers: • Surface epithelium – A thin, moist layer of cells that forms the interior stomach lining. Epithelium makes a sticky, thick liquid called mucus that protects the stomach. • Lamina propria – A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium membrane. Within and supported by the lamina propria are stomach glands formed by cells that have the functions of producing enzymes, acid, mucus, and hormones. • Muscularis mucosae – A thin strip of muscle that separates the mucosa from the submucosa. Submucosa – A layer of connective tissue, blood vessels, and nerve cells. It also contains larger lymph vessels and channels. Muscle – A type of soft tissue that helps move food through the stomach. It is also called muscularis propria. Subserosa – A layer of connective tissue that supports the serosa. Serosa – An outer membrane that covers the stomach. The serosa is also called the serous membrane. This membrane allows the stomach to move smoothly against other organs. Layers of the stomach wall The wall of the stomach is made up of 5 layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscle layer, subserosa, and serosa. Stomach cancer Most stomach (gastric) cancers start in the cells that line the inside of the stomach and make mucus. These are called adenocarcinomas. Almost all stomach cancers are adenocarcinomas. Adenocarcinomas of the stomach are the focus of this book. There are 2 major types of stomach adenocarcinomas. Intestinal – Cells of the intestinal type stick together and form tube- and glandshaped structures. This type is more likely to have mutations that can be treated with targeted therapy. Diffuse – Cells of the diffuse type don’t stick together and appear scattered over a wide area that can't be easily seen on the surface. This type is less common. Treatment is based on the type of stomach cancer and the location of the tumor. Esophageal cancer Tumors that start in the cardia of the stomach and cross over into the area between the esophagus and stomach (esophagogastric junction) are treated as esophageal cancers. More information on esophageal cancer is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. When my dad was told he had 6 months to live in 2013, we were devastated. But instead of giving in, we created a team of experts that helped us navigate through this terrible prognosis. Today, my dad is clinically cured. My advice to those newly diagnosed is to be your own advocate and find a support community. How stomach cancer spreads Stomach cancer starts in the innermost layer and grows outward through the layers of the stomach wall. Cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, veins, arteries, and organs such as the liver, pancreas, and spleen. It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Stomach cancer can also grow inwards and form an ulcer or masses that can cause symptoms. Stomach cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the stomach. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Those with stomach cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage stomach cancer has not grown beyond the first layer (mucosa) of the stomach wall. The tumor is often small (2 centimeters or less) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced stomach cancer has invaded other layers of the stomach wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near the stomach. Metastatic stomach cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, abdominal lining (peritoneum), and distant lymph nodes. It may also spread to the lungs or bone. Cancer in regional lymph nodes In locoregional or locally advanced stomach cancer, cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes near the stomach. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diagram showingstomachcancercellsinthelymph nodesCRUKsvg Key points The stomach is part of the digestive system. The digestive system takes in and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. Most stomach (gastric) cancers start in cells that line the inside of the stomach wall and secrete mucus. These stomach cancers are called adenocarcinomas. The stomach wall is made up of 5 main layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscle, subserosa, and serosa. Cancer starts in the innermost layer and grows outward through the layers of the stomach wall. Stomach cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, pre-cancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the stomach. Early-stage stomach cancer has not grown beyond the first layer (mucosa) of the stomach wall. The tumor is often small and is not in any lymph nodes. In locoregional or locally advanced stomach cancer, cancer has invaded the second layer (submucosa) of the stomach or beyond. Cancer might be found in nearby (regional) lymph nodes. Cancer can also grow inside the stomach and form an ulcer or mass. Cancer can spread to distant parts of the body through the blood or lymphatic system. This is called metastatic stomach cancer. A distant metastasis could be in the liver, abdominal lining, or distant lymph nodes. 2 Testing for stomach cancer 12 13 14 15 15 17 Test results General health tests Nutrition assessment Blood tests Imaging tests Endoscopy procedures H. pylori tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy (including biomarker tests) will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about the specific type of cancer you have. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Testing takes time. It might take days or weeks before all test results come in. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on your exact type of cancer, as well as any treatments and the date each treatment started. For possible tests, see Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. If there is a history of H. pylori (bacteria) infection and/or treatment, it is important to let the medical team know. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing.
