About bone cancer 5 What is bone cancer? 6 What is bone? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Bone cancer includes a group of cancers that start in the bone or cartilage. This is called primary bone cancer and differs from other types of cancers that can spread (metastasize) to the bone. This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers. Bone cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or kidney) and travel to the bones are called secondary bone malignancies or metastatic cancer. Metastatic cancers to bone behave very differently from primary bone cancers. Sarcomas Most primary bone cancers are sarcomas. Sarcomas are a rare group of cancers. There are 2 main types of sarcomas: Soft tissue sarcomas Bone sarcomas Soft tissue includes fat, muscles, nerves, tendons, blood and lymph vessels, and other supportive tissues of the body. Soft tissue sarcomas are more common than bone sarcomas. Bone sarcomas, such as osteosarcomas, start in the cells that form NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Bone Cancer, 2025 bone. Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are the most common types of bone cancer, except multiple myeloma. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Soft Tissue Sarcoma and NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Multiple Myeloma at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone. A bone tumor may be cancerous (malignant) or noncancerous (benign). Bone tumors often occur in areas of the bone that grow rapidly (the metaphysis). This book will discuss the following: Chondrosarcoma – starts in the cells that form cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that covers the ends of bones to form a smooth surface that makes a joint. Also, cartilage gives structure to the nose, ears, larynx, and other parts of the body. Chordoma – starts in notochordal cells that form the spine and vertebrae. Chordomas are usually found in the lower spinal column (sacrum) or at the base of the skull. Ewing sarcoma – starts in the bone marrow and commonly occurs in the diaphysis of long bones or flat bones like the pelvis or scapula (shoulder blade). Giant cell tumor of bone (GCTB) – is an overgrowth of cells found in the part of the bone called the metaphysis and extends into the area of the bone that widens to form a joint (epiphysis). Osteosarcoma – starts in cells most commonly in the areas of the bone that grow rapidly (metaphysis), near the growth plates. What is bone? Bone is a living tissue made up of specialized bone cells and collagen. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the body. Bone tissue also contains blood vessels, nerves, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. Bone is made up of the following: Compact bone or cortical bone – the hard, dense outer layer of bone that is covered by a membrane of strong connective tissue called the periosteum Spongey bone or cancellous bone – the spongy, porous inner layer of bone that contains red marrow Bone marrow – found in the center of most bones and has many blood vessels There are 2 types of bone marrow: red and yellow. Red marrow contains blood stem cells that can become red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets. Yellow marrow is made mostly of fat. Red marrow is often replaced by yellow marrow as we age. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. Our body has 206 bones. Bones provide structure and support, protect our organs, create blood cells, store chemicals the body needs, and produce hormones. Bone is light, yet strong and can regrow. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for bone cancer provides an overview of tests you might receive, how fertility might be impacted by treatment, and the role of biomarker and tumor mutation testing. Chapter 3: Bone cancer staging explains how bone cancer is staged and where bone tumors might be found in the body. Chapter 4: Types of treatment gives an overview of the types of different treatment and who might be on your treatment team. Chapter 5: Chondrosarcoma discusses chondrosarcoma treatment. Treatment is usually surgery to remove the tumor. Chapter 6: Chordoma discusses chordoma treatment. Treatment options include surgery or radiation therapy. Chapter 7: Ewing sarcoma discusses Ewing sarcoma treatment options. Treatment begins with systemic therapy. Chapter 8: Giant cell tumor of bone discusses GCTB treatment options. GCTB is usually not cancer, but needs aggressive treatment to prevent bone damage. Chapter 9: Osteosarcoma discusses osteosarcoma treatment options. Osteosarcoma is the more common type of bone cancer. Treatment is a combination of therapies. Chapter 10: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. Consider seeking the opinion of a specialist in your type of bone cancer. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! 2 Testing for bone cancer General health tests Fertility (all genders) Performance status Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Genetic cancer risk testing Biomarker testing Key points Questions to ask Treatment planning starts with testing. Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat primary bone cancer. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Bone cancer is very rare. Many health care providers are not experts in diagnosing or treating these tumors. Therefore, it is important to find a doctor, treatment center, or hospital that has experience in your type of bone cancer. Use resources on page 61 of this book to help you find an experienced doctor and treatment center. General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist to discuss the options before starting treatment. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. For more information on fertility preservation, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Therefore, becoming pregnant or having one's partner become pregnant during treatment should be avoided. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score or the Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Blood tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. They require a sample of your blood, which is removed through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Some blood tests are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood. High levels of ALP can be a sign of bone tumors, liver disorders, or pregnancy. A bone scan might be performed if you have high levels of ALP. Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. RBCs carry oxygen throughout your body, WBCs fight infection, and PLTs control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. A CMP will look for higher than normal calcium levels in your blood called hypercalcemia. Calcium is needed for healthy teeth, bones, and other body tissues. Bone damage from cancer can cause your bones to release calcium into the bloodstream, which can lead to illness and other health issues. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fast-growing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Pregnancy test Those who can become pregnant should be given a pregnancy test before treatment begins. Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body to look for cancer deposits. A medical doctor called a radiologist will interpret the test and send a report to your doctor. While these reports might be available to you through your patient portal or patient access system, please wait to discuss these results with your care team. You may not have all of the following tests. X-ray An x-ray is a type of radiation. In small doses, it is used to make pictures of the inside of the body. It might be referred to as a radiograph. Bone scan A bone scan uses a radiotracer. A radiotracer is a substance that releases small amounts of radiation. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer will be injected into your vein. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body. Areas of bone damage take up more radiotracer than healthy bone and show up as bright spots on the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, previous injuries, or other health problems such as arthritis. The scan takes about 30 minutes. You will be asked to hold still during the scan. At one point the scanner will be less than one inch from your face. Talk to your care team about what to expect. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the quality of the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave your body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. CT scan A CT or CAT (computed tomography) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. In many cases, contrast will be used. MRI scan An MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays, which means there is no radiation delivered to your body during the test. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist if you have any metal in your body. During the test, you will likely be asked to hold your breath for 10 to 20 seconds as the technician collects the images. Contrast is often used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. PET scan A PET (positron emission tomography) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and how much sugar is being taken up by the cancer cells. This gives an idea about how fast the cancer cells are growing. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. Biopsy A biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue from your body for testing. A diagnosis of bone cancer is confirmed using a core needle or surgical biopsy. The placement of the biopsy is critical. Therefore, it is recommended that the biopsy be performed by an experienced surgeon at the center where you will receive treatment. Core needle biopsy removes tissue samples with a hollow needle that can grab a piece of tissue. This is frequently performed under light sedation by an interventional radiologist. It can also be performed by your surgeon in the office. Surgical (open) biopsy removes a sample of the tumor through a small incision. A surgical biopsy should be performed by your treating surgeon. This requires a trip to the operating room. Bone marrow tests Bone marrow tests might be done in certain cases. There are 2 types of bone marrow tests that are often done at the same time: Bone marrow aspirate Bone marrow biopsy It is recommended that a biopsy be performed by an experienced surgeon at the cancer center where you will receive treatment. Your bone marrow is like a sponge holding liquid and cells. An aspirate takes some of the liquid and cells out of the sponge, and a biopsy takes a piece of the sponge. The samples are usually taken from the back of the hip bone (pelvis). You will likely lie on your belly or side. Your doctors will first clean and give sedation and/or numb your skin and outer surface of your bone. For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone. Liquid bone marrow will then be drawn into a syringe. For the biopsy, a wider needle will be used to remove a core sample. You may feel bone pain at your hip for a few days. Your skin may bruise. Genetic cancer risk testing Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva from spitting into a cup or a cheek swab. The goal is to look for gene mutations inherited from your birth parents called germline mutations. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. You can pass these genes on to your children. Also, blood relatives might carry these mutations. Tell your care team if there is a family history of cancer. Biomarker testing A sample from your biopsy will undergo lab tests to look for specific DNA mutations/ alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Biomarker testing is performed on a case-by-case basis and may increase the time it takes for biopsy results. Biomarker testing is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Your care team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: IDHGenes are written with italics like this: IDHWhen a gene or protein is found, it is shown with a plus sign like this: . When a gene or protein has not been found, it is written with a negative sign like this: IDH1-. Ewing sarcoma A cell must make a copy of its chromosomes before dividing into two cells. Sometimes, there are mistakes in the copies. One type of mistake is when parts (DNA) of two chromosomes break off and switch with each other. This is called a translocation. It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Pembrolizumab (Keytruda), nivolumab (Opdivo), or ipilimumab (Yervoy) might be used for TMB-H tumors in some cases. Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your birth parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Mutation testing uses methods such as nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). IDH1 mutation Some gene mutations such as IDH1 can be targeted with specific therapies such as ivosidenib (Tibsovo). Ivosidenib is for those with chondrosarcoma who are prone to have IDH1 mutations. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. "Be your own advocate. Talk to someone who has gone through the same thing as you. Ask a lot of questions, even the ones you are afraid to ask. You have to protect yourself and ensure you make the best decisions for you, and get the best care for your particular situation." Key points Tests are used to plan treatment and check how well treatment is working. Some types of treatment for bone cancer can affect fertility. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting treatment. A diagnosis of bone cancer is confirmed using a core needle or surgical biopsy. The placement of the biopsy is critical. Therefore, it is recommended that the biopsy be performed at an experienced surgeon at the center where you will receive treatment. A sample from a biopsy of your tumor might be tested to look for biomarkers or proteins. Your health care provider might refer you for genetic testing to learn more about your cancer. Questions to ask What type of bone cancer do I have? What does this mean in terms of my prognosis and treatment options? h Is there a sarcoma cancer center or hospital nearby that specializes in this type of cancer? What tests will I have? How often will they be repeated? Will my insurance pay for these tests? Where can I find help to pay for tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps and when? 3 Bone cancer staging Overview How is bone formed? TNM scores Numbered stages Key points Questions to ask Cancer staging is used to help make treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor, and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. This chapter provides a general overview of cancer staging. Overview There are many staging systems. Most staging systems include information about: Where the tumor is located in the body The size of the tumor Whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes Whether the cancer has spread to a different part of the body Tumor grade, which refers to how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope How is bone formed? Bone is a living tissue made of cells (osteocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts), calcium, phosphate, hydroxyapatite (a bone mineral), and collagen. New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing. Once ossification is complete, bone is continuously being replaced by a process called remodeling. Remodeling breaks down and rebuilds bone and helps maintain normal calcium levels in the body. When calcium is needed, cells called osteoclasts break down bone. This releases calcium into the bloodstream. At the same time, bone-forming cells called osteoblasts create bone from calcium in the bloodstream. Some types of bone cancer can interrupt this process. Parts of bone: Epiphysis – the end of the bone, which is covered with cartilage to make a joint. Metaphysis – located between the physis (growth plate) and diaphysis. Diaphysis – the middle region of the bone. Physis – the growth plate, which is made of cartilage. After skeletal maturity, this leaves a physeal scar or line visible in the bone. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage most bone cancers. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on imaging and biopsy results, your doctor will assign a score or number to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other organs. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage. A TNM example might look like this: T1N0M0 or T1, N0, MThis might represent a stage 1 cancer. h T (tumor) – Size and depth of the main (primary) tumor N (node) – If cancer has spread to nearby (regional) lymph nodes M (metastasis) – If cancer has spread (metastasized) to distant parts of the body Cancer staging is often done twice. Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is based on a physical exam, biopsy, and other tests. Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery such as in the removal of a lymph node. Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next. TX – Primary tumor cannot be measured h T0 – Tumor cannot be found h T1 – Tumor is 8 cm or smaller T2 – Tumor is larger than 8 cm T3 – More than 1 tumor in the primary bone site Tumors in spine Staging for tumors found in the bones of the spine (vertebra) are described next. TX – Primary tumor cannot be measured T0 – Tumor cannot be found T1 – Tumor confined to 1 vertebra or 2 vertebrae next to one another (adjacent) T2 – Tumor confined to 3 adjacent vertebrae T3 – Tumor confined to 4 or more adjacent vertebrae, or any nonadjacent vertebrae T4 – Tumor has grown into spinal canal or large (great) vessels Tumors in pelvis Staging for tumors found in the pelvis are described below. TX – Primary tumor cannot be measured T0 – Tumor cannot be found T1 – Tumor is confined to 1 pelvic segment and has not grown outside the bone • T1a – Tumor is 8 cm or less • T1b – Tumor is larger than 8 cm T2 – Tumor is confined to 1 pelvic segment but has grown outside the bone or 2 segments that have not grown outside the bone • T2a – Tumor is 8 cm or less • T2b – Tumor is larger than 8 cm T3 – Tumor spans 2 pelvic segments and has grown outside the bone • T3a – Tumor is 8 cm or less • T3b – Tumor is larger than 8 cm T4 – Tumor spans 3 pelvic segments or crosses the sacroiliac joint (SIJ) • T4a – Tumor involves SIJ and extends into the spine • T4b – Tumor has grown into major blood vessels N = Node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. Regional lymph nodes are those located near the tumor. Cancer in the lymph nodes is called nodal disease and is rare in bone cancer. NX – Cancer in nearby lymph nodes cannot be measured. N0 – There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes. N1 – Cancer is found in the regional lymph nodes. M Metastasis Bone cancer can spread through blood or the lymphatic system. Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is defined as MWhen cancer is not metastatic it is labeled as MBone cancer can spread to the lung, other bones, or other parts of the body. Bone cancer that has metastasized to the lung is still called bone cancer. M0 – No distant metastasis M1 – Distant metastasis is found • M1a – Metastasis is in the lung • M1b – Metastasis is in the bone or other distant sites The pelvis The pelvis is a basin-shaped structure that supports the spinal column and protects the abdominal organs. G = Grade Another factor used in staging is the cancer grade. Grade describes how abnormal the tumor cells look under a microscope (histology). Higher-grade cancers tend to grow and spread faster than lower-grade cancers. GX means the grade can’t be determined, followed by G1, G2, and GWell differentiated (G1) means the cancer cells look like normal cells. Poorly differentiated (G3) means the cancer cells look very different compared to normal cells. GX – Grade cannot be determined G1 – Well differentiated (low grade) G2 – Moderately differentiated (high grade) G3 – Poorly differentiated (high grade) Numbered stages Number stages range from stage 1 to stage 4, with 4 being the most advanced. The stage of a bone cancer is determined by combining the T, N, M, and G scores. These stages are written as stage I, stage II, stage III, and stage IV. Not all bone cancers are described using numbered stages. See Guide
