Prostate cancer basics What is prostate cancer? What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? What causes prostate cancer? What is early-stage prostate cancer? Can prostate cancer be cured? Key points The prostate is a gland located deep inside the pelvis. Everyone with a prostate has a chance of getting prostate cancer. It’s usually not fatal, particularly early-stage prostate cancer. This chapter gives an overview of this common cancer. What is prostate cancer? Prostate cancer is a disease where cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. The prostate is a gland located just below the bladder in the pelvis, deep inside the area of your body between your hip bones. The prostate is about the size of a ping-pong ball and is an important part of the male reproductive system. Besides the prostate, the male reproductive system includes the penis, seminal vesicles, and testicles. Cancer is what happens when something goes wrong with the natural cell process causing some cells to grow out of control. Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells develop genetic changes (mutations) that allow them to multiply and make many more cancer cells. The cancer cells crowd out and overpower normal cells. This can end up harming the body. Cancer cells survive much longer than normal cells do. They can replace many normal cells and cause organs to stop working well. Cancer cells can also spread outside the prostate to other areas of the body. The prostate gland is an important part of the male reproductive system. It’s located in the pelvis just below the bladder and is about the size of a ping-pong ball. What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? A symptom is a feeling or problem that can indicate a disease or condition. Prostate cancer often grows slowly and shows no symptoms for a long time. But you don’t have to have symptoms to have prostate cancer. In fact, most patients who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer have no symptoms. Symptoms are more common for those with advanced prostate cancer. Symptoms, if they occur, can include: Blood in the urine or semen Burning or pain while urinating Unexplained weight loss Bone, hip, or back pain It’s important to know that prostate cancer has many of the same symptoms as a condition called enlarged prostate (also called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH). An enlarged prostate can push against the bladder and compress the urethra, which slows the flow of urine and can cause a feeling that you haven’t fully emptied your bladder. Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in American males, after skin cancer. However, prostate cancer has one of the highest survival rates of any cancer when found early. BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis. Urethra: A tube that carries urine from the bladder and out of the body. The prostate wraps around the urethra just beneath the bladder. Seminal vesicles: Two glands that make another part of the fluid that becomes semen. The seminal vesicles are located above the prostate and behind the bladder. Bladder: An organ that holds urine. What causes prostate cancer? Many people who develop prostate cancer wonder where it came from and how they got it. Cancer researchers don’t know exactly what causes prostate cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). The fact is, everyone with a prostate has a risk of getting prostate cancer. But several factors are linked to a higher risk of prostate cancer. These are called risk factors. A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting cancer. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause prostate cancer, but people with prostate cancer usually have one or more of these risk factors: Age The biggest risk factor for prostate cancer is age. Prostate cancer is diagnosed most often in those aged 65 years and above. Your chances of getting prostate cancer increase as you become older. Family history Your family health history is information about the diseases and health conditions in your family. A family history reflects a pattern of certain diseases among family members. Having a close family member with prostate cancer (a sibling or parent) increases the chance of getting it yourself. Those with a family history of certain other cancers (breast, ovarian, colon, pancreatic, and other cancers) may also be at a higher risk for prostate cancer. Genetic factors When cancer “runs in the family,” genetic testing can be done to find specific genetic changes (mutations) known to be linked with prostate cancer or other cancers. For instance, having an inherited genetic change in the BRCA2 gene increases the risk of getting prostate cancer. But genetic abnormalities that aren’t inherited can occur, too. Race In the United States, Black males are more likely than white males to develop prostate cancer. Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed. Black males are also twice as likely to die from prostate cancer compared with white males. Prostate cancer is diagnosed less often in Hispanic and Asian males than in white and Black males. Several things may contribute to these differences, such as barriers to accessing health care (including early detection screening), biological and genetic factors, and other causes. Specialists are researching each of these areas. In light of these issues, Black males may want to talk with their health care providers about getting screening tests earlier than what’s recommended for other males. What does aggressive mean? When health care professionals describe cancer as aggressive, they mean the cancer is likely to grow or spread more rapidly than average. Aggressive is also used to describe therapy that’s stronger or more intense than other treatment options. Diet and lifestyle No one particular diet has been found to prevent prostate cancer or to cause prostate cancer. However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Eating more fruits and vegetables may reduce this risk. Exercise and losing weight may also decrease the aggressiveness of prostate cancer and the likelihood of dying from it. On the other hand, smoking and obesity increase the risks of developing and dying from prostate cancer. What is early-stage prostate cancer? Prostate cancer can be grouped into earlystage cancer or advanced-stage cancer. Early stage Early-stage prostate cancer has not spread beyond the prostate. The cancer usually grows slowly and stays in the prostate. Cancer that is contained entirely within the prostate is called localized prostate cancer. This book is all about early-stage (localized) prostate cancer. Advanced stage Advanced stage means that cancer cells have spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spreading is called metastasis or metastatic cancer. Metastatic prostate cancer has spread to the lymph nodes, bones, liver, lungs, and other organs. Advanced-stage prostate cancer can be separated into two types: Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer. (It’s also called locally advanced prostate cancer. This book will call it regional prostate cancer to avoid confusion between localized and locally advanced.) Cancer that spreads outside the prostate to other parts of the body is called metastatic prostate cancer. Early vs. advanced prostate cancer Early-stage prostate cancer has not visibly spread beyond the prostate gland. It usually grows slowly and stays within the prostate. This is also called localized prostate cancer. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has grown outside the prostate and may have spread to other areas in the body such as lymph nodes (bottom left), bones, or organs like the liver or lungs (bottom right). This is also called metastatic prostate cancer. Can prostate cancer be cured? Early-stage prostate cancer is highly treatable and often curable. The earlier that prostate cancer is diagnosed and treated, the more likely that a patient will live without cancer. Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives. Scientists have learned a great deal about prostate cancer in recent years. As a result, today’s detection methods and treatments work better than those in the past. Also, many patients with prostate cancer have more treatment choices now than they had before. Treatments for early-stage prostate cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, and hormone therapy, among others. However, some people with prostate cancer don’t need to be treated right away. Many patients with early-stage prostate cancer can have their cancer managed with active surveillance. During active surveillance, you’ll have regular tests to keep an eye on your cancer. But you won’t have treatment unless the cancer grows or changes in a way that requires treatment. The goal of active surveillance is to avoid the potential side effects of treatment, with the option for treatment in the future if you need it. Some patients on active surveillance may never have to be treated. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread to other areas of the pelvis (regional prostate cancer) or the body (metastatic prostate cancer), and it's usually a life-long disease. But treatment can slow down its growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong your life. Treatments for advanced-stage prostate cancer include hormone therapy, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, surgery, and other therapies. Early detection and treatment can greatly reduce the chances of getting advanced-stage prostate cancer. Many people with advancedstage prostate cancer continue to live their lives with the cancer and, in the end, may die from something else. Something to remember: When found early, prostate cancer has one of the highest survival rates of any cancer. Key points Prostate cancer develops when cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. Age is the biggest risk factor for prostate cancer. As you age, your chances of developing prostate cancer increase. Everyone with a prostate is at risk for prostate cancer. Not everyone with prostate cancer has symptoms. For most people, prostate cancer usually grows slowly and stays within the prostate. Early-stage prostate cancer hasn’t spread outside the prostate gland. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spread is called metastasis. Not everyone diagnosed with prostate cancer needs treatment. 66 Be your own advocate. Talk to someone who has gone through the same thing as you. Ask a lot of questions, even the ones you are afraid to ask. You have to protect yourself and ensure you make the best decisions for you, and get the best care for your particular situation.” 2 Tests for prostate cancer About testing Common prostate tests General health tests Diagnostic tests What’s next? Key points If you haven’t yet been diagnosed, testing is necessary to find out if you have prostate cancer and whether it’s early-stage or advanced-stage cancer. Testing also helps your providers plan the right treatment. About testing Health care providers use a variety of tests to find prostate cancer and to determine how advanced the cancer is. Tests are used to plan treatment, check how well treatment is working, and monitor your health after treatment ends. This chapter will help you know what tests you may have and what to expect during testing. When you go for testing, bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Testing begins with prostate cancer screening tests, followed by tests of your general health, and then diagnostic tests, if needed. Not every person with prostate cancer will receive every test listed here. When you go for testing, bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Common prostate tests Common prostate cancer tests are used to detect the possibility of prostate cancer in someone who’s undiagnosed. They’re also used to check and monitor prostate cancer in patients who have been diagnosed. Two common tests that look for prostate cancer are the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test and digital rectal exam. PSA test This is a blood test that measures the amount of PSA in your bloodstream. PSA is a protein made inside the prostate gland. Its job is to help semen transport sperm. All prostate cells, both normal cells and cancer cells, make PSA. If there’s something wrong with the prostate— like prostate cancer—the prostate may make more PSA. While most PSA goes into semen, a little bit ends up in the bloodstream, too. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer. Likewise, an increase in PSA after treatment may indicate that the treatment is losing effectiveness. However, age and other factors—such as an enlarged prostate or a urinary tract infection— can also cause high levels of PSA. This means that a PSA test by itself can’t provide a diagnosis of prostate cancer. That’s why a PSA test is often paired with imaging or a digital rectal exam, or both, to decide whether you need a biopsy. PSA level (also called total PSA) is measured in nanograms of PSA per milliliter (ng/mL) of blood. PSA testing Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a protein made inside the prostate gland. If there’s something wrong with the prostate, the prostate may make more PSA. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer. But a high PSA level doesn’t automatically mean you have prostate cancer. Rather, it’s a warning sign that you may need further testing. Digital rectal exam Don’t be fooled by the name—no high-tech electronics are used in a digital rectal exam. For this test, the word “digital” means “finger.” The doctor will insert a finger into your rectum to feel your prostate for any signs of cancer. The doctor will wear gloves and use a lubricant to make it easier. A digital rectal exam (also called a prostate exam) may be an awkward and unpleasant form of testing. But it’s the simplest and most direct way to check the size and texture of your prostate. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during a digital rectal exam, though. So it’s usually paired with a PSA test and other factors— your age, race, family history, and more—to determine whether you need further testing. Don’t fear the digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is the simplest and most direct way to check the size and texture of your prostate. Although it can be uncomfortable, it’s over in less than a minute. Digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is a procedure in which your doctor inserts a finger into your rectum to feel your prostate. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during this exam, though. So other tests, like PSA level and imaging, are used to get a more complete picture of your prostate health. General health tests Health history Your care team needs to have all your health information. They’ll ask you about any health problems and treatments you’ve had in your life. Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your doctor needs to know if you’re taking them. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of your family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members about other health issues like heart disease and diabetes, at what age they were diagnosed, and if anyone died from cancer. Share this information and any changes to your family history with your care team. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems). You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing. Talk with your doctor about whether a biopsy or imaging should be the next test you take. Imaging tests An imaging test takes pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images can reveal cancer, including its size, location, and other features such as the size of the prostate itself. The images may show where the cancer started (primary tumor) and whether the cancer has spread (metastasized). Imaging is also used after cancer treatment to see how well it worked and to check if the cancer comes back. Imaging can come before, during, or after a biopsy. h Before – Imaging is sometimes ordered beforehand to find out if a biopsy is truly necessary. During – Imaging is used during a biopsy to guide the removal of tissue samples. After – Imaging may come after a biopsy to see the size and location of the cancer, which helps to plan treatment. Imaging methods for detecting prostate cancer include MRI, CT, PET, ultrasound, bone scan, or a combination of these. After your scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist. A radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in reading imaging tests. The radiologist will send the results to your doctor. This information helps your doctor plan the next steps of your care. Your doctor will discuss the results with you. Be sure to ask any questions you may have. Imaging may not be needed for early-stage prostate cancer. If your PSA, digital rectal exam, and prostate biopsy results indicate that your risk is low for the cancer to metastasize (spread beyond the prostate), then you may not need imaging tests at this time. Your team may recommend one or more of the following imaging tests to look for cancer growth: MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. An MRI can provide a detailed view of the cancer within the prostate. It’s also used to see if cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes or to the bones in your pelvis. MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still. Because an MRI uses magnets, don’t bring any metal objects (such as jewelry, cell phone, wristwatch, belts with metal buckles) into the imaging room. CT scan If MRI is unavailable or not recommended for you, you might have a computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan instead. A CT scan takes many x-rays of your body from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a single detailed image. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan is used after you’ve been diagnosed to determine the extent of your cancer or to see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. A PET scan requires injecting a radioactive substance called a tracer into your bloodstream. It takes about an hour for the tracer to circulate throughout your body. The tracer targets your cancer cells, which show up as bright spots on the scan. Afterward, the radiotracer is passed out of your body in your urine. PET imaging A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan is used after you’ve been diagnosed to determine the extent of your cancer or to see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during this exam, though. So other tests, like PSA level and imaging, are used to get a more complete picture of your prostate health. Like an MRI and CT, a PET scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. A PET appointment can take 1 to 2 hours, including about 30 minutes of actual scanning time. Because PET uses a different imaging method, it’s often combined with other types of imaging, such as CT or MRI, to provide an even more detailed image. These combined methods are called PET/CT or PET/MRI scans. PSMA/PET PSMA/PET imaging is a special kind of PET imaging that locates a protein called prostatespecific membrane antigen (PSMA) on the surface of prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells make a lot of PSMA, so doctors developed tracers that target this specific protein. PSMA/PET is especially useful for detecting cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes or has metastasized to farther areas. It’s also used to monitor prostate cancer that may return after treatment (recurrence). So, someone with early-stage prostate cancer may not need PSMA/PET imaging when first diagnosed. Your team will discuss whether a PSMA/PET scan could be helpful for your specific cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastases, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. PET/CT scan of prostate cancer This image combines PET and CT scans to show a cross-section of a patient’s pelvis. The greenish circle identifies cancer in the prostate, while the intense red dot indicates cancer that has spread to a pelvic lymph node. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones. Areas of bone damage absorb more tracer than healthy bone. These areas show up as bright spots in the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, or other health problems. Biopsy Although a high PSA level and an abnormal digital rectal exam are signs of possible prostate cancer, the only way to confirm cancer is to have a biopsy. A biopsy is a procedure in which a sample of cells or tissue is removed from your body and tested for cancer. A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk. The risks for a prostate biopsy include infection, bleeding, and pain. Doctors use invasive tests only when needed. You and your doctors will decide when, or if, you need a biopsy. A biopsy procedure is usually performed by a urologist. A urologist is a doctor who’s an expert in treating diseases of the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. For this procedure, you’ll lie on your side with your knees curled up or you’ll lie on your back with your legs raised. You’ll be given anesthesia to numb the pain or to put you to sleep. The urologist will insert a lubricated probe into your rectum. The probe provides a visual image of the prostate. The urologist will then insert a hollow needle into the prostate gland using the video display to guide it. The needle will be inserted either through the rectum or through the perineum (the skin between the anus and scrotum). When the urologist removes the needle, it will pull out a small sample of prostate tissue called a core. A core sample is only 1 to 2 Biopsy of the prostate A biopsy removes a sample of tissue that is tested for cancer. This is a transperineal biopsy, in which a needle is inserted through the perineum and into the prostate. An ultrasound probe, which goes into the rectum, helps the doctor guide the needle into the prostate. MRI scans of your prostate may be combined with the ultrasound image to provide a highly accurate picture of the cancer. millimiters wide and about 12 to 20 millimeters long—about the width of a toothpick and the length of a raisin. The urologist will typically take 12 or more core samples from different parts of the prostate. Checking different areas provides a more complete evaluation of cancer throughout the gland. After the biopsy samples are removed, they’ll be sent to a lab for testing. At the lab, a specialist called a pathologist will examine the samples under a microscope and test them for cancer. The pathologist will find out how many of the core samples contain cancer and will also measure the percentage of cancer in each core. With this information, the pathologist can estimate the amount of cancer in the prostate. Also, by knowing where each core sample was taken, the pathologist can tell if the cancer is concentrated in a certain section of the prostate. The pathologist will put these results into a report. Ask your doctor to review the pathology report with you. It’s common to have more than one biopsy if you’re on active surveillance. You’ll have one biopsy to determine your diagnosis and another biopsy within a year (called a confirmatory biopsy) to see if any changes have happened over time. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. However, it’s important to know that a biopsy doesn’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find abnormal changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop an abnormal change (mutation). A mutation is when something is different in your genes than in most other people’s genes. Sometimes an abnormal change can cause a gene to make the wrong type of protein or make no protein at all. This abnormality could affect the cell, which may in turn cause a disease such as cancer. Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be present before you’re born (called an inherited or germline mutation) or occur on their own later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are germline testing and molecular biomarker testing: Germline testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your doctor might suggest genetic germline testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. Germline mutations in genes like BRCA1 or BRCA2 are also related to breast cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, and skin cancer (melanoma). Germline mutations in MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2 are related to colorectal and uterine cancers in addition to prostate cancer. If a germline mutation is suspected based on your family’s or your own health history, you should ask about testing. Your doctor can talk to you about testing or refer you to a genetic counselor. A genetic counselor is an expert who has special training in genetic diseases. A genetic counselor can help you decide whether you would like to undergo germline testing and help you interpret the results of these tests. Germline testing is recommended for those with prostate cancer and any of the following: Family members or relatives who have or had prostate cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, intestinal cancer, and certain other cancers Family history of mutations in certain genes including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, and others High-risk, very-high-risk, regional, or metastatic prostate cancer regardless of family history Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry Having any other type of cancer Talk to your medical providers and/or a genetic counselor about your family history of cancer. Molecular biomarker testing In biomarker testing, a sample from your biopsy is tested to look at its molecular components. This information helps figure out how likely your cancer could spread to other parts of the body. Biomarker testing can be considered for those with localized, regional, or metastatic prostate cancer. Biomarker testing is sometimes called genomic testing, tumor profiling, or molecular tumor testing. The main reason to have a molecular biomarker test is to help assess whether you have lower risk or higher risk prostate cancer. If you have lower risk cancer, you may be able to avoid or delay treatment such as surgery or radiation therapy, which means you’d also avoid or delay any treatment-related complications and side effects. At the same time, a molecular biomarker test can flag those who have higher risk prostate cancer, which may give them a head start on treatment. Molecular biomarker testing is discussed further in Chapter What’s next? After you’ve had all these tests to find out if you have prostate cancer, your care team will put together all your test results to figure out whether your prostate cancer is lower risk or higher risk. Once your level of risk has been identified, your team will assess whether you need treatment and, if so, what your treatment plan will be. Key points An unusually high amount of PSA in the bloodstream may be a sign of prostate cancer. h A digital rectal exam is the simplest way to check the size and texture of your prostate. A biopsy is used to confirm (diagnose) prostate cancer. It’s a procedure that removes samples of cells or tissue to find cancer. Imaging tests may be used to see if the cancer has spread beyond the prostate. Imaging may not be needed for earlystage prostate cancer. A genetic test is used to find abnormal changes (mutations) in your genes. To find out if you have an inherited risk for cancer, you can talk to your doctor about germline testing or ask to be referred to a genetic counselor. A biopsy sample of your tumor might be tested to look at its molecular components (biomarker testing). 3 Assessing your risk Risk groups Life expectancy Nomograms Molecular biomarker tests What’s next? Key points It’s important to know the risk of your cancer getting worse. Your care team will look at several key characteristics to assess your risk. This chapter explains each of these characteristics. After being told you have cancer, your next thought may be, “How soon can I start treatment to get rid of it?” The fact is, a lot of patients with early-stage prostate cancer don’t need treatment right away. Many never need treatment. Figuring out whether someone needs treatment and which treatment to use requires an assessment of their risks. A risk assessment is a process for identifying potential problems and then considering what would happen if those problems occurred. In the case of early-stage prostate cancer, a risk assessment considers how likely the cancer is to remain within the prostate or to spread to outside the prostate. A risk assessment also considers whether the cancer may come back after treatment (recurrence) and, if so, whether it can be controlled with a different type of treatment. To assess risk, your care providers use these tools: risk groups, life expectancy, nomograms, and molecular biomarker tests. Although you may not receive all of them, let’s look at each of these assessment tools in turn: Risk groups Your care team will look at the clinical characteristics of your cancer, such as your prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, biopsy results, and other test results. From this information, your providers can classify your disease into one of five different risk groups, from very low risk to very high risk. Why do you need to know your risk group? Because your risk group is the basis for your prognosis. A prognosis predicts the likely course and outcome of a disease. Your prognosis guides your treatment options. For example, patients with lower risk generally get minimal treatment or no treatment at all. Patients with higher risk usually get more aggressive treatment. Test results and calculations—PSA level, Grade Group, tumor stage, and biopsy results—are put together to determine your risk group. PSA level A simple blood test will tell you how much prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is in your bloodstream. A high PSA level may indicate a risk for prostate cancer. However, high PSA levels can vary by age, race, and other factors: Age – PSA level tends to increase with age. For people in their 40s, a PSA level above 5 ng/mL is very suspicious for disease. For those in their 60s, 5 ng/mL or higher is suspicious. A PSA level of 10 ng/mL or higher is a danger sign at any age. Race – Normal PSA levels tend to be higher in Black males than in white males—about 1 point higher on average among males of the same age. Researchers don’t know the reason for this difference, but they’re investigating it. Enlarged prostate – The larger the prostate, the more PSA it can make. Other health issues besides cancer can also cause an enlarged prostate. h Sex and exercise – PSA may increase after ejaculation or vigorous exercise. Your doctor may recommend avoiding sex and exercise for 2 or 3 days before a PSA test. This short break allows PSA to return to its usual level. Drugs and supplements – Some medicines, herbals, and supplements can also affect PSA level. Biopsy – PSA level rises temporarily after a biopsy of the prostate. 66 Now more than ever, those living with cancer are living better, longer lives thanks to the power of research and advancements in treatment.” PSA level doesn’t tell the whole story, though. There are other ways that PSA can be interpreted, such as PSA density. PSA density If you have a larger prostate, you’re also likely to have a higher PSA level. But that doesn’t mean you have a greater risk for prostate cancer. To adjust for this, care providers calculate PSA density. PSA density is the amount of PSA compared to the size of the prostate. PSA density is calculated by dividing the PSA level by the prostate size. The size of the prostate is measured by transrectal ultrasound or MRI scan. A higher PSA density (above 15 ng/ mL², for example) indicates a greater likelihood of cancer. PSA density also accounts for those with small and very small prostates, who could have prostate cancer even with low PSAs. Grade Group If cancer cells are found in your biopsy samples, further testing can identify your cancer risk. Results from these tests may indicate that the cancer will grow and spread quickly, for example. Or the results may suggest that the cancer will grow very slowly and not spread outside of the prostate at all. This information helps plan the best treatment for your type of cancer. By looking at your biopsy samples, the pathologist will identify certain cancer cell patterns (called Gleason patterns), which are used to calculate your Gleason score, which translates to your Grade Group, which estimates your risk. This can be confusing at first (Gleason patterns? Gleason score? Grade Group?) but it’s not all that complicated in the end. Read on. Gleason patterns After studying your biopsy sample under a microscope, the pathologist will assign a number based on the “pattern” of cancer cells (Gleason pattern) in the sample. A cancer cell pattern that looks more like normal and healthy cells is given a lower number. A cell pattern that looks more abnormal is assigned a higher number. Gleason patterns range from 1 to However, patterns 1 and 2 are so rarely found that they are no longer used. So the lowest (most normal) pattern number is Gleason score If prostate tumors contained only one pattern of cancer cells, estimating risk would be much easier. But prostate biopsies often contain more than one pattern of cells. To account for this, the two most common Gleason patterns found in the biopsy sample are combined into a single Gleason score. The pattern of cancer cells that takes up the largest area in the sample is assigned the first number. The pattern that accounts for the secondlargest area is given the second number. Add these two numbers together and you get a Gleason score. For example: pattern pattern Gleason score of 7 A Gleason score represents how much your biopsy sample looks like normal prostate tissue. It also estimates how aggressive your prostate cancer is—how quickly it might grow and whether it will spread. A higher Gleason score means the cancer is more likely to grow and spread quickly than a cancer with a lower Gleason score. Gleason scores range from 6 to 10, where 6 is the lowest score. A Gleason score of 7 is intermediate-grade, and 8 to 10 is high-grade. This can be confusing because 6 seems like it would be a medium score, not a low score. So to make Gleason scores simpler to use, they can be organized into Grade Groups. Grade Groups A Grade Group is a way to interpret a Gleason score. There are five Grade Groups, numbered 1 to The higher the Grade Group, the more aggressive the cancer. So cancer with a Gleason score of 6 is assigned as Grade Group 1 to show that it is the lowest score. Likewise, cancer with a Gleason score of 9 or 10 becomes Grade Group 5, the highest score. Importantly, the Grade Group system also takes into account that Grade Group 2 and Grade Group 3 both have a Gleason score of The difference is the cancer in Grade Group 3 is more serious. Why? Because the first number of the Gleason score in Grade Group 3 is higher than the first number in Grade Group 2 . Remember, the first number is given to the cancer pattern that makes up the largest area of the biopsy sample. Grade Group 1 indicates low risk. Grade Groups 2 and 3 correspond to intermediate risk. Grade Groups 4 and 5 predict high risk and very high risk. See Guide Guide 1 How to find your risk from your Gleason score
