The esophagus Parts of the esophagus Esophageal cancer How cancer spreads Key points The esophagus is a long, muscular tube through which food passes from the throat to the stomach. Esophageal cancer starts when abnormal cells grow out of control in the layers of the esophagus inner lining. The esophagus The esophagus is located behind the trachea (windpipe) and in front of the spine. It is part of the digestive system. The digestive system transports and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes the esophagus, stomach, liver, pancreas, small intestine, colon, rectum, and anus. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. When you swallow, small contractions, called peristalsis, along with gravity and pressure, move food down the esophagus and into the stomach. Except during the act of swallowing, the esophagus is normally empty. The esophagus is about 10 inches long and about 1 inch wide. It has two sphincters, circular muscles that normally remain closed except during the act of swallowing. One sphincter is located at the top of the esophagus and the other at the bottom, between the esophagus and the stomach. The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach. After being broken down into a liquid, food enters the small intestine. The large intestine prepares unused food to be moved out of the body. Parts of the esophagus Esophagus wall The esophagus wall contains 4 layers: Mucosa – inner membrane that is in contact with food. It has 3 parts: Epithelium – innermost lining and is normally made up of flat, thin cells called squamous cells Lamina propria – thin layer of connective tissue under the epithelium Muscularis mucosa - very thin layer of muscle under the lamina propria Submucosa – layer of connective tissue just below the mucosa that contains blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. In some parts of the esophagus, this layer also includes glands that secrete mucus. Muscularis propria – thick layer of muscle under the submucosa. It contracts in a coordinated way to push food down the esophagus from the throat to the stomach (peristalsis). Tunica adventitia – outermost layer, made of connective tissue Upper esophagus The upper part of the esophagus is made of striated muscle. Striated muscle generates force and contracts. It is under your control (voluntary). Middle esophagus The middle part of the esophagus is a mixture of striated and smooth muscle. Lower esophagus The lower part of the esophagus consists only of smooth muscle. Smooth muscle is not under your control. It is involuntary, like a reflex. Esophagogastric junction The esophagogastric junction (EGJ) is the place where the stomach and the esophagus meet, found just beneath the diaphragm. It is also called the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). It separates the contents of the esophagus from the contents of the stomach (acid). Esophageal cancer Cancer of the esophagus (or esophageal cancer) starts when cells in the epithelium of the esophagus begin to grow out of control. There are 2 types of esophageal cancer: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is often found in the upper and middle esophagus but can occur in the lower esophagus as well. Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) starts in the mucus-making cells of the inner lining of the esophagus. Adenocarcinomas are often found in the lower esophagus but can occur in the middle esophagus as well. Today, most esophageal cancers in North America and Western Europe are adenocarcinomas. Squamous cell carcinoma is more common in Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa. Treatment is based on the type and location of esophageal cancer, in addition to the stage of the tumor (where it is in the body). Some tumors that start in the stomach and cross over into the area between the esophagus and stomach (esophagogastric junction) are treated as esophageal cancers and not as stomach cancers. However, this depends on the exact location of the tumor. Siewert types used as part of cancer staging describe where the tumor is relative to the esophagus and stomach. Barrett esophagus In Barrett esophagus (BE), the squamous cells that line the lower part of the esophagus have changed or been replaced with abnormal cells as a result of chronic reflux. Those with Barrett esophagus are at risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. How cancer spreads Esophageal cancer usually starts in the innermost layer (mucosa) and grows outward through and along the layers of the esophagus wall. Cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, veins, arteries, and organs such as the liver, pancreas, lung, and spleen. It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Through your cancer care, you might find measurements using the metric system (centimeters, millimeters, etc.). That is because your care team uses the metric system to measure many aspects of treatment. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus. The tumor may be very small (2 centimeters or less, which is about the size of a peanut) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced cancer has invaded the esophagus wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near or in direct contact with the esophagus. Metastatic cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, distant lymph nodes, lung, bone, and brain. Key points Most esophageal cancers start in cells that line the inside of the esophagus and secrete mucus. These esophageal cancers are called adenocarcinomas. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. The esophagus wall is made up of 4 main layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and tunica adventitia. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, pre-cancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Early-stage esophageal cancer is contained in the esophagus. The tumor is often small and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced esophageal cancer has invaded other layers of the esophagus wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near or in direct contact with the esophagus. Cancer can spread to distant parts of the body through the blood or lymphatic system. This is called metastatic esophageal cancer. Distant metastases could be in the liver, distant lymph nodes, and lung. 2 Diagnosing esophageal cancer Test results General health tests Nutritional assessment Blood tests Imaging tests Endoscopy procedures Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support. These can be different people for different tasks or change over time. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about the specific type of cancer you have. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician informed of changes to this list. In your contact list, include information on your exact type of cancer, as well as any treatments and the date each treatment started. Set up an online patient portal (MyChart or health record account) if it’s available, which can help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. Remember, many times, the portal messages are not immediately seen by a nurse or physician. Be sure to ask your care team how best to communicate with them, especially in an emergency. More information on these tests is on the following pages. For possible tests, see Guide
