7 The breast 8 Breast cancer 9 Early detection 10 Key points Breast cancer screening basics The breast Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Regular screening and breast exams help find breast cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest. The breast is made of milk ducts, fat, nerves, lymph and blood vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Behind the breast is the pectoral muscle and ribs. Muscle and ligaments help hold the breast in place. Breast tissue contains glands that can make milk. These milk glands are called lobules. Lobules look like tiny clusters of grapes. Small tubes called ducts connect the lobules to the nipple to carry breast milk. The ring of darker breast skin is called the areola. The raised tip within the areola is called the nipple. The nipple-areola complex is a term that refers to both parts. Lymph is a clear fluid that gives cells water and food. It also helps to fight germs or tumor cells. Lymph drains from breast tissue into lymph vessels and travels to lymph nodes near your armpit (axilla). Nodes near the armpit are called axillary lymph nodes (ALNs). The breast The breast is a glandular organ made up of milk ducts, fat, nerves, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Ductal carcinoma is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. If you are looking for more information on breast cancer, read NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Ductal Carcinoma In Situ, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Invasive, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Metastatic, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines Early detection Breast cancer screening aims to find breast cancer early. Breast cancer found earlier is treated more successfully, reducing the risk of dying from breast cancer. This book will cover screening recommendations for those assigned female at birth. It will also discuss screening and testing options for those who are pregnant or lactating (breastfeeding), and those with breast pain, nipple discharge, changes in the skin, lumps, or other symptoms that require further testing. Transgender individuals Due to lack of evidence, this book does not provide screening guidance for transgender individuals. Transgender individuals should consult with their primary care physician to determine when/whether screening would be appropriate. Those assigned male at birth Those assigned male at birth do not undergo regular mammogram screening. However, if you have breast pain or redness, or a change in the size and shape of one breast, then see your health care provider and read about recommended tests in Chapter Health care providers During regular health checkups and breast cancer screening, you might come in contact with the following health care providers (HCPs): Breast specialist is an expert in breast health and disease. Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully. Breast cancer screening saves lives by detecting cancer earlier, when it can be treated more successfully. When I first discovered the small hard pebble under the skin of my chest wall, I felt sort of silly asking for so much testing for such a tiny bump. But, nearly 10 years later, I realize that this changed my life and may be the reason why I am still here today!” 2 Screening and diagnostic tests
