Pancreatic cancer basics What is pancreatic cancer? What causes pancreatic cancer? What are the stages of pancreatic cancer? What is the best treatment for pancreatic cancer? Key points Pancreatic cancer is one of the most common cancers. It is a challenging cancer to treat, but treatment is improving. Experts are studying the best ways to treat pancreatic cancer and are developing new treatments. Read this chapter to learn the answers to some common questions about pancreatic cancer. What is pancreatic cancer? Pancreatic cancer starts in a large gland called the pancreas. The pancreas is part of the digestive system. It makes enzymes that break down proteins, fats, sugars, and starches in food. It also makes hormones called insulin and glucagon that control blood sugar levels. Pancreatic cancer affects cell growth. Pancreatic cancer cells make many new cancer cells and do not die when they should. The overgrowth of pancreatic cancer cells becomes a mass called a tumor. Pancreatic cancer cells also don’t stay in place and may grow into nearby body tissue. They may break away from a tumor, spread to other areas, and form more tumors. There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells. Exocrine cells make and move digestive enzymes. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the tube-like ducts of the pancreas. They are also called pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and are the focus of this book. Pancreas Sounds like PAN-kree-us. The pancreas is deep inside the body. It sits just below the liver and behind the stomach. In adults, the pancreas is about 6 inches long. Less often, pancreatic cancer forms from endocrine cells. Endocrine cells make hormones. Pancreatic cancer that forms from endocrine cells is called a neuroendocrine tumor. Information on pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the app NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer. What causes pancreatic cancer? Many people with cancer wonder how they got it. Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer. Such risk factors include: Lifestyle factors, such as smoking tobacco, heavy alcohol use, and a less healthy diet Major contact with cancer-causing chemicals, such as pesticides Health conditions, such as diabetes and chronic inflammation of the pancreas Close blood relatives with pancreatic, breast, ovarian, or colorectal cancers or melanoma About 1 in 10 pancreatic cancers are hereditary. This means that a higher risk was passed down to you by your parents through your genes. The genetic cause of hereditary pancreatic cancer is unknown in most families. Hereditary health conditions that are known to increase risk of pancreatic cancer include: Hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Lynch syndrome, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome Familial malignant melanoma syndrome, also known as melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome or familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome Hereditary pancreatitis Genetic tests detect the genes that have been linked to these hereditary conditions and are discussed in Chapter What are the stages of pancreatic cancer? The stages of pancreatic cancer range from stage 0 to stage Often, stages 1 through 4 are written with Roman numerals—stages I, II, III, and IV. The cancer stages are based on the size of the pancreatic tumor and how far the cancer has spread. Stage 0 pancreatic cancer is only in the innermost layer of the duct wall. Stage 1 pancreatic cancer consists of a tumor that is 4 centimeters or smaller and has not spread outside the pancreas. For comparison, a golf ball is 3 centimeters. h Stage 2 pancreatic cancer consists of a tumor that is larger than 4 centimeters or the cancer has spread to 1 to 3 nearby lymph nodes, which are small structures that help the body fight disease. Stage 3 pancreatic cancer has grown through the pancreas to nearby major arteries or has spread to 4 or more lymph nodes. Stage 4 pancreatic cancer has spread far and commonly involves the liver, lungs, or lining of the abdomen. What stage is metastatic cancer? Stage 4 pancreatic cancer is metastatic cancer, but other stages may become metastatic cancer over time. Metastatic pancreatic cancer has spread far from the pancreas. Is staging used to plan treatment for pancreatic cancer? Unlike other cancers, experts do not plan initial treatment mainly based on the five pancreatic cancer stages. Instead, they use a different system to decide treatment for cancers that are not metastatic. This system is described in Chapter What is the best treatment for pancreatic cancer? There’s no treatment for pancreatic cancer that’s best for everyone. The best treatment is the treatment that’s right for you. Your treatment plan should follow best practices— cancer care based on science and expert consensus. The following chapters explain the best practices of testing for and treating pancreatic cancer. Some people with stage 1, 2, or 3 pancreatic cancer have surgery to remove cancer from the body. Surgery is an option for more people now than in the past due to medical advances. Other types of cancer treatment are used with Pancreatic cancer stages Very rarely, pancreatic cancer is only in the duct (stage 0) or only in the pancreas (stage 1 or some stage 2). Stage 2 and stage 3 also include cancers that have spread to beanshaped structures called lymph nodes (shown). Other stage 3 cancers have grown to nearby arteries, such as the celiac axis. Most often, pancreatic cancer has spread far from the pancreas, which is stage surgery to improve results. Ongoing research is assessing whether it is better to receive these other treatments before or after surgery. Read Chapter 5 to learn more about treatment with surgery. For most people with pancreatic cancer, surgery is not the best treatment. Instead, drug treatment is most often used to control cancer’s growth and reduce symptoms. Research has compared current cancer drugs to identify the best ones. In recent years, drug regimens based on cancer markers have been used to improve results. Treatment without surgery is discussed in Chapter Clinical trials offer hope to all people with pancreatic cancer. Clinical trials are a type of health research that tests new ways of fighting cancer. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial that is a good fit for you. Key points The pancreas is a gland that helps digest food and control blood sugar. h Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the ducts of the pancreas and are the focus of this book. h Some families share genes that increase the risk of pancreatic cancer. There are five stages of pancreatic cancer that range from stage 0 to stage Your cancer care team will make a treatment plan that is specific to you. Talk with your team about options for treatment and supportive care. Advocate for yourself Take steps to get the best care for you. Here are 3 ways to advocate for yourself: Read this book to learn about pancreatic cancer and its treatment. Use the questions in the back of the book to discuss and decide with your care team which care options are right for you. Choose a multidisciplinary team. It takes a team of experts to treat pancreatic cancer. Read this book to learn which care providers are part of the team. You choose your team by deciding where to get care. Getting a second opinion on treatment may help you decide which treatment to receive. Be an active team member. When discussing treatment, share your goals with your team. Ask questions when you don’t understand. Supportive care is part of cancer care, so tell your team about symptoms and other challenges you have. Key parts of supportive care are explained in this book. 2 Tests for pancreatic cancer Multidisciplinary consult Imaging Endoscopic tests Biopsy Blood tests Genetic tests for inherited mutations Biomarker tests for profiling Key points A series of tests is needed to identify pancreatic cancer and make a treatment plan. Imaging is key to staging the cancer and deciding if surgery is a treatment option. Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care. Look for descriptions of team members throughout this book. Consult meeting When your care team meets to consult with one another, they will review your health records and the tests done prior to your visit. Expect to be asked questions about your past and current health. This is called a medical history. You will also be asked about the health history of your close blood relatives. A team member will perform a physical exam of your body to check for signs of disease and to assess your physical ability. You will likely have at least one imaging scan and some of the other tests listed in Guide The team will discuss the diagnosis with you and if you need more tests. They will also discuss your treatment options. One of the main goals of the team is to decide if surgery is an option. The team will work with you to make a care plan that is specific to you. Stay positive, seek happiness and joy, surround yourself with love, and connect to a higher power."
