7 Adrenal glands 8 Adrenal tumors 8 Adrenocortical carcinoma 9 Signs and symptoms 9 Risk factors 10 Key points Adrenal tumors form in one or both adrenal glands. Adrenal glands produce hormones that affect your body in different ways. This chapter reviews the basics of adrenal tumors. Adrenal glands Your body has 2 adrenal glands. They are located on top of each kidney. Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Each adrenal gland has 2 main parts: Adrenal cortex – This is the outer part of the adrenal gland. The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape). Adrenal medulla – This is the inner part of the adrenal gland. The medulla makes 3 hormones: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. These hormones control the body’s response to stress. This includes the “fight or flight” surge of adrenaline. Adrenal glands Adrenal glands are small, triangle-shaped glands found on the top of the kidneys. These glands make hormones that help to regulate your immune system, response to stress, metabolism, and other functions. AnatomyoftheAdrenalGland Adrenal tumors Adrenal tumors can occur in one or both adrenal glands. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign (not cancer). Adrenal tumors often do not cause symptoms and are found through an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan performed for another reason. Adrenal tumors are categorized in the following ways: Benign (not cancer) adrenal tumors do not metastasize (spread) to other parts of the body. This type of tumor is often found by chance through imaging tests done for an unrelated issue. Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones. Pheochromocytoma – This type of tumor begins in the adrenal medulla and is characterized by symptoms of high blood pressure, headache, rapid heartbeat, and sweating. Most pheochromocytomas are benign, but can be cancerous. Adenoma – This is the most common type of adrenal gland tumor, also referred to as adrenocortical adenoma. It is a noncancerous tumor that can be functioning or nonfunctioning. If an adenoma is small and/or does not produce excessive hormones, and is not causing symptoms, it may not need Types Adrenal tumor categories are further broken down into types. They include the following: Adrenocortical carcinoma Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is an adrenal cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. It can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. If caught early, adrenal cancer can be cured. However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer). Adrenal cancer is a rare cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. Adrenal cancer, also called adrenocortical cancer (ACC), can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones from the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, hereditary conditions have been linked to an increased risk of developing an adrenal tumor. 2 Testing 12 Test results 13 General health tests 14 Imaging tests 15 Blood tests 16 Genetic tests 16 Biopsy 17 Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. Testing is used to diagnose and plan treatment for adrenal tumors. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Adrenal tumors will be diagnosed based on a series of test results. Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Keep these things in mind: Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific disease. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician informed of changes to this list. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. A medical or health history will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. Physical exam During a physical exam, a health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your weight and height Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Tell your doctor if you feel pain. Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed? What is our family’s ancestry—from what countries did our ancestors originate? Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting test images, will write a report and send this report to your doctor. Your test results will be discussed with you. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed three-dimensional (3D) picture. In most cases, contrast will be used. Contrast Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. Contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test. The types of contrast vary but are different for CT than for MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) and prednisone (steroids), to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys are not working well. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Contrast might be used. An MRI may be used as an initial test, to check treatment results, and to see if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests
