About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of blood cancer that starts in the stem cells of bone marrow. There are many subtypes of AML found in adults. This chapter will provide an overview of AML. What is AML? In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood. In turn, there are not enough healthy red blood cells, platelets, and white blood cells. This causes serious health issues. For this reason, AML is fatal if left untreated. Subtypes of AML There are many subtypes of AML. They are grouped and treated based on the presence or absence of certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes and other factors. In addition to AML, this book includes information about the following: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. What is blood? AML is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes) fight infections. WBCs include granulocytes (or neutrophils), monocytes, and lymphocytes. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the organ that creates blood in our body. It is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. Stem cells multiply to maintain a supply throughout our lifetime. Some of these stem cells gradually develop into blood cells through a process called differentiation. At any given time, the bone marrow contains cells at various stages of development, from very immature to nearly mature. Once a blood stem cell fully develops into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet, it is released into the bloodstream as needed. Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. AML affects the myeloid progenitor cells, which develop into red blood cells, granulocytes (a type of white blood cell), and platelets. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . www.nccn.org AML starts in the blood stem cells and makes abnormal myeloblasts, also called blasts or leukemia cells. What are blasts? A blast is an immature white blood cell. Blasts are committed to becoming a type of blood cell. Myeloblasts mature into granulocytes also known as neutrophils. These are types of immune cells that help prevent and control infection. In AML, abnormal myeloblasts are found in the bone marrow or blood. These blasts crowd out other blood cells causing bone marrow or blood to not work as it should. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for AML provides an overview of tests you might receive, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment. Chapter 4: AML discusses treatment for AML. Chapter 5: APL discusses treatment of a rare subtype of AML. In APL, the abnormal fusion gene PML::RARA is found. Chapter 6: BPDCN discusses treatment of an aggressive subtype of AML. BPDCN can be found in blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and/or skin. Chapter 7: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. Consider seeking the opinion of an AML specialist. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! 2 Testing for AML Overview General health tests Blood tests Fertility (all genders) Performance status Bone marrow tests Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Imaging tests Heart tests Lumbar puncture Key points Questions to ask Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat AML. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Overview Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat AML. A diagnosis of AML is based on the presence of myeloid blasts in the bone marrow or blood. The number of blasts required to be diagnosed with AML can vary. In general, the number of blasts must be 20 percent or more of all cells found in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 bone marrow cells are blasts. However, a diagnosis of AML is possible with any number of blasts, particularly if certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes are also present. Unlike other cancers of organs, like lung cancer or breast cancer, AML does not have stages. Many cancers spread from the location where they originate, and the extent or severity of cancer is determined by how far it has spread. AML arises from the bone marrow, which is present in nearly all of our bones. Because AML cells arise from multiple bones and flow in the blood all over the body, traditional staging is not useful. Instead, AML testing looks for specific gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes, which can tell your care team how aggressive your leukemia might be. Possible tests and procedures can be found in Guide Information on possible tests and procedures can be found in this chapter. You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Physical exam During a physical exam, a health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate. Check your height and weight. Listen to your lungs and heart. Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat. Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Testing takes time. It might take weeks for all your test results to come in. Please wait to discuss the results with your doctor. Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Blood tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. They require a sample of blood, which is removed through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Be prepared to have many blood tests during AML treatment and recovery to check treatment results, blood counts, and the health of organs like your liver and kidneys. Some possible tests are described next. The list starts with more common tests. Complete blood count and differential A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. A CBC is a key test that gives a picture of your overall health. AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot. Clotting is a process or series of events. Proteins, called coagulation factors, are needed for clotting. They are made by the liver. These tests are known together as a coagulation panel or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel. It is standard to screen for clotting problems. An impaired clotting process is common in leukemia. This is called coagulopathy. You may have bleeding and bruises or blood clots. HLA typing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is a protein found on the surface of most cells. It plays an important role in your body’s immune response. HLAs are unique to each person. They mark your body’s cells. Your body detects these markers to tell which cells are yours. In other words, all your cells have the same set of HLAs. Each person’s set of HLAs is called the HLA type or tissue type. HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT). To find a donor match, your proteins will be compared to the donor’s proteins to see how many proteins are the same. A very good match is needed for a transplant to be a treatment option. Otherwise, your body will reject the donor cells or the donor cells will react against your body. Blood or tissue samples from you and your blood relatives will be tested first. Fertility (all genders) Treatment with targeted therapy and other forms of systemic therapy can affect your fertility, or the ability to have children. If possible, ask your care team before starting therapy how cancer and cancer treatment might affect your fertility. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation can be found at NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score or the Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. Bone marrow tests Leukemia starts in the bone marrow. To diagnose AML, samples of bone marrow are usually removed and tested before starting any treatment. The bone marrow sample should be reviewed by a pathologist who is an expert in the diagnosis of AML. This review is often referred to as histology, histopathology, or hematopathology review. The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of cells. Tests will be done on the biopsied cells. There are 2 types of bone marrow tests that are often done at the same time: Bone marrow aspirate Bone marrow biopsy A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy are bedside procedures. They are not surgeries and do not require an operating room. Your care team will try to make you as comfortable as possible during the procedures. In some places, sedation or anesthesia is provided during these procedures. The samples are usually taken from the back of the hip bone (pelvis). You will likely lie on your belly or side. For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone. Liquid bone marrow will then be drawn into a syringe. For the biopsy, a wider needle will be used to remove a small piece of bone. You may feel bone pain at your hip for a few days. Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells. Certain biomarkers are targeted in AML treatment. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC looks for the immunophenotype of cells from a biopsy or tissue sample. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy Samples of bone and liquid bone marrow are removed in a biopsy. Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Biomarker and genetic tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely path the cancer will take called a prognosis. This genetic testing is different from family history genetic testing or genetic cancer risk testing. This testing looks for changes only in the leukemia cells that have developed over time, and not changes in the rest of the body’s cells. It is sometimes called molecular testing, tumor profiling, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Proteins are given names such as FLTGenes are identified in italics like this: FLT AML cells sometimes have changes in genes and chromosomes that can be seen under a microscope or found with various other tests. Testing of your leukemia cells can gather specific information about your leukemia to help guide treatment. AML genetic changes AML cells can have changes in genes and chromosomes. Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation. Amplification – When a part or whole chromosome or gene is increased (for example, duplicated) Deletion – When part of a chromosome or gene is missing such as del(5q) Insertion – When a new part of a chromosome or gene is included Inversion – Switching of parts within one chromosome such as inv(16) and inv(3) Point mutation – When part of a gene is changed Chromosome translocation and gene rearrangement – Switching of parts between 2 chromosomes. When described at the chromosome level, it is called a translocation. When described at the gene level, it is called rearrangement. For example, the chromosome translocation is written as t(8;21)(q22;q1) and its gene rearrangement is written as RUNX1::RUNX1T Leukemia predisposition syndromes Some hereditary cancer syndromes can be passed down from biological parent to child. A family history of leukemia can affect treatment. A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia. However, these may not be the genetic changes you were born with. Therefore, a skin punch biopsy is used. In this procedure, a small piece of skin and connective tissue is removed to get DNA that hasn’t been altered by AML. This will be used to see if you inherited genes that increase your risk of leukemia. Leukemia predisposition syndrome can affect how your body responds to treatment. Blood and saliva can be used when AML cells disappear (in remission). Biological family members who are possible hematopoietic cell donors might be tested for leukemia predisposition syndrome. Testing of cells not affected by your leukemia (like skin) can help tell if you have a leukemia predisposition syndrome. AML mutation testing Mutation testing using methods such as karyotype (or cytogenetics), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), next-generation sequencing (NGS), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) look for changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells (genes and chromosomes). A sample of your blood or bone marrow will be used to see if the AML cancer cells have any specific mutations. Some mutations may determine the type of treatment given. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA. FISH can look for changes (abnormalities) that are too small to be seen with other methods. It can only be used for known changes. Since this test doesn’t need growing cells, it can be performed on either a bone marrow or blood sample. Sometimes, a bone marrow sample is needed to get all the information the care team needs to help plan your treatment. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of your chromosomes. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of chromosomes. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. A karyotype will show extra, missing, rearranged, or abnormal pieces of chromosomes. Since a karyotype requires growing cells, a sample of bone marrow or blood must be used. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. This is important when testing for treatment response or remission. A real-time or reverse transcriptase (RT) is a type of PCR used to look for gene rearrangements such as PML::RARA. This aids in diagnosis and monitoring response to targeted therapies. Imaging tests In some cases, imaging tests may be performed. This is based on your individual situation. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of the body to look for sites with leukemia outside the bone marrow. Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin. It rarely spreads to the lining of the brain and spinal cord. Imaging tests can also show areas of infection or bleeding that may impact your care. A radiologist, a medical expert in interpreting imaging tests, will interpret the test and send a report to your doctor. While these reports might be available to you through your patient portal or patient access system, please wait to discuss these results with your care team. You will likely not have all of the following tests. Contrast material Contrast material is a substance used to improve the quality of the pictures of the inside of the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. Contrast might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). Oral contrast does not get absorbed from your intestines and will be passed with your next bowel movements. IV contrast will leave the body in the urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Not all imaging tests require contrast, but many do. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. Brain CT scan A CT of the brain is used to look for bleeding. A CT or CAT (computed tomography) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. Contrast may or may not be used. This is a very quick test. Brain MRI scan An MRI can show if the outer layer of the brain is swollen from leukemia (leukemic meningitis). An MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays, which means there is no radiation delivered to your body during the test. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist about any metal in your body. Contrast may or may not be used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. The space is small and enclosed. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. MRI scans take longer to perform than CT scans. PET scan A PET (positron emission tomography) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and how much sugar is being taken up by the cancer cells. This gives an idea about how fast the cancer cells are growing. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures. It is a type of ultrasound. For this test, small patches will be placed on your chest to track your heartbeat. Next, a wand with gel on its tip will be slid across part of your bare chest. A picture of your beating heart will be seen on a screen. The pictures will be recorded for future viewing. An echocardiogram shows the structure (valves and muscle thickness) and function of your heart (or ejection fraction). Ejection fraction is the amount of blood pumped out of the left side of your heart every time it beats. If the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart is lower than normal, this indicates decreased heart function. 66 It is important to understand what you are going through. If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said. Can you please explain it in simpler terms?' This is an important way of advocating for yourself." Lumbar puncture Leukemia can travel to the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. This may cause symptoms such as headaches, neck pain, and sensitivity to light. A test may be needed to know if leukemia cells are in your spinal fluid. A lumbar puncture (LP) is a procedure that removes spinal fluid by inserting a needle into the middle of the lower back. It is also called a spinal tap. Key points In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood making it hard for blood to do its work. An aspirate or biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue or group of cells for testing. A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy. In general, to be diagnosed with AML, 20 percent or more myeloblasts must be present in the bone marrow or blood. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 cells are blasts. In certain cases, a diagnosis of AML is possible with any number of blasts, particularly if specific gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes are also present. Genetic and biomarker tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely course the cancer will take called a prognosis. Questions to ask What subtype of AML do I have? What does this mean in terms of prognosis and treatment options? Is there a cancer center or hospital nearby that specializes in my subtype of AML? What tests will I have? How often will they be repeated? h Will my insurance pay for these tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps? When? 3 Types of treatment Care team Systemic therapy Chemotherapy Targeted therapy Clinical trials Hematopoietic cell transplant Supportive care Side effects Key points Questions to ask Treatment for all types of AML will be in phases. The goal of treatment is to put the cancer in remission. This chapter provides an overview of possible treatments and what to expect. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for your subtype of AML. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important to have regular talks with your care team about your goals for treatment and your treatment plan. Care team Treating acute myeloid leukemia (AML) takes a team approach. Treatment decisions should involve a multidisciplinary team (MDT). An MDT is a team of health care and psychosocial care professionals from different professional backgrounds who have knowledge (expertise) and experience in your type of cancer. This team is united in the planning and implementing of your treatment. Ask who will coordinate your care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout cancer treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Your team might include the following doctors: A hematologist or hematologic oncologist is a medical expert in blood diseases and blood cancers and treats these conditions. A medical oncologist treats cancer using systemic (drug) therapy. A pathologist or hematopathologist analyzes the cells and tissues removed during a biopsy and provides cancer diagnosis, staging, and information about biomarker testing. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy works throughout the body. Types include chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. Systemic therapy might be used alone or with other therapies. Goals of systemic therapy should be discussed before starting treatment. Your preferences about treatment are important. If you have any religious or personal beliefs about certain kinds of treatment, now would be the time to share them with your care team. You will likely get either a catheter or a port to deliver systemic therapy, fluids, and blood products into your body. A catheter is a thin, long tube that is often placed in the upper arm. This goes into a large vein and stays there until treatment is complete. A port is a small, round disc that is usually placed in the chest. The type and location of catheter or port will be tailored to your needs and treatment plans. Treatment options Treatment options are often described in the following ways: Preferred therapies have the most evidence they work better and may be safer than other therapies. Other recommended therapies may not work quite as well as preferred therapies, but they can still help treat cancer. Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the standard of care for treating AML. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and normal cells. Standard of care is the best-known way to treat a particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Chemotherapy is most often a liquid that is slowly injected into a vein with a needle. The final dose differs between people because it is based on body weight. In most cases, chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which chemotherapy is used. You might spend time in the hospital during treatment. Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count. There are different doses for cytarabine (Ara-C): Standard High (HiDAC) Intermediate Low (LDAC) The dose you will receive is based on many factors. Ask your care team for the details of your treatment. What is the dose? How often is treatment received? How many treatment cycles are needed? Will I need to spend time in the hospital? If so, for how long? Cytarabine or methotrexate may be used to treat AML in the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. In this case, it is injected into the spinal fluid. This is called intrathecal chemotherapy. Hypomethylating agents Methyl groups are molecules found in DNA. Leukemia cells often have too many methyl groups. These extra groups can block genes from being turned on and off. Hypomethylating agents (HMAs) block methyl groups from binding to DNA. They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a form of systemic therapy that focuses on specific or unique features of cancer cells. Targeted therapies seek out how cancer cells grow, divide, and move in the body. These drugs stop the action of molecules that help cancer cells grow and/or survive. Some examples of targeted therapies can be found in Guide CD33 Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is a type of targeted therapy that is linked to a chemotherapy drug. It attaches to a cell surface protein called CD33, then enters the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Many leukemic blasts have CD33 proteins. Mature blood cells do not have CD33 and are not affected. GO may delay blood count recovery and cause liver issues. Core binding factor Core binding factor (CBF) creates a shortage of all types of mature blood cells. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples
