Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer Inflammatory breast cancer Key points Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare, aggressive cancer where cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest. The breast is made of milk ducts, fat, nerves, lymph and blood vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Behind the breast is the pectoral (chest) muscle and ribs. Muscle and ligaments help hold the breast in place. Breast tissue contains glands that can make milk. These milk glands are called lobules. Lobules look like tiny clusters of grapes. Small tubes called ducts connect the lobules to the nipple. The ring of darker breast skin is called the areola. The raised tip within the areola is called the nipple. The nipple-areola complex (NAC) is a term that refers to both parts. Lymph is a clear fluid that gives cells water and food. It also helps to fight germs. Lymph drains from breast tissue into lymph vessels and travels to lymph nodes near your armpit (axilla). Nodes near the armpit are called axillary lymph nodes (ALNs) Invasive Ductal Carcinoma (IDC) of the Breast Invasive ductal carcinoma Most inflammatory breast cancers are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Milk ducts are thin tubes that carry milk from the lobules of the breast to the nipple. It is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. It is the second most common type of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. It’s important not to dismiss any strange skin changes to the breast, including redness, swollen nipple area, or warmth to the touch. Seek medical attention right away. Possible signs of IBC: Peau d’orange (pitted or dimpled appearance of skin) Skin thickening (skin has an orange-peel texture) Edema (swelling caused by excess fluid in body tissue) Erythema (reddening of the skin, usually in patches) Inflammatory breast cancer In inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. Like other breast cancers, IBC can happen in those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. In inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. For weeks my bra had been feeling uncomfortably tight. I tried to ignore it but then felt sharp, shooting pains and the skin looked 'funny.' It took multiple office visits and finally to a surgeon to learn I had inflammatory breast cancer (IBC). a nurse and didn't know you could have breast cancer without a lump." 2 Testing for IBC 20 21 21 23 24 25 Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor status HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Distress screening Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram. Since there is swelling (edema) and redness (erythema) of the breast, IBC can look like an infection and therefore be difficult to diagnose. Often, a biopsy of the affected skin is done to diagnose the tumor. Test results You will have blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to stage the cancer. The biopsy sample will be tested for hormone receptors (estrogen and progesterone) and HER2 receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Get copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about the specific type of cancer you have. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. Include in your contact list information on the exact type of cancer, as well as any treatments and the date they started. For possible tests, see Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer, or where the cancer started, and if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Guide 1 Possible tests Medical history and physical exam (H&P) by multidisciplinary team. Medical photographs will also be taken. Complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) including liver function tests (LFTs), and alkaline phosphatase Biopsy with pathology review Determine tumor status including: • Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) hormone receptor (HR) status • HER2 status Address fertility, birth control, and sexual health concerns Genetic counseling and testing if at risk for hereditary breast cancer Imaging: • Diagnostic mammogram. Ultrasound and breast MRI, as needed • Chest CT. Contrast might be used. • CT or MRI of abdomen with or without pelvis. Contrast will be used. • Bone scan or PET-CT Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Clinical breast exam Clinical breast exam (CBE) is a physical exam of the bare breast performed by a health care provider to check for lumps or other changes. It is done while you are seated and/or lying down. Your provider should take time to palpate (feel) the entire breast, including the armpit. A nurse or assistant might also be in the room during the exam. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist to discuss the options before starting treatment. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t really sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. Non-hormonal birth control methods (barrier methods, IUDs) are preferred after a breast cancer diagnosis. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms and IUDs to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. Blood tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. They require a sample of your blood, which is removed through a needle placed into your vein. Some blood tests you might have are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood. High levels of ALP can be a sign cancer has spread to the bone or liver. A bone scan might be performed if you have high levels of ALP. Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout your body, white blood cells fight infection, and platelets control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures 14 different substances in your blood. It is usually done on the plasma part of your blood. A CMP provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of your liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or that cancer has spread to the liver. Pregnancy test Those who can become pregnant will be given a pregnancy test before treatment begins. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting treatment. Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests show the primary tumor, or where the cancer started, and look for cancer in other parts of the body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting imaging tests, will write a report and send this report to your doctor. The doctor will discuss the results with you. While these reports are available to you through your patient portal, please wait to discuss these results with the doctor. The following imaging tests are not in order of importance. You will not have all of these tests. Bone scan A bone scan uses a radiotracer. A radiotracer is a substance that releases small amounts of radiation. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer will be injected into your vein. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. However, the test is quick and painless. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body. Areas of bone damage take up more radiotracer than healthy bone and show up as bright spots on the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, previous injuries, or other health issues. Bone x-ray An x-ray uses low-dose radiation to take one picture at a time. A tumor changes the way radiation is absorbed and will show up on the x-ray. X-rays are also good at showing bone issues. Your care team may order x-rays if your bones hurt or were abnormal on a bone scan. Diagnostic mammogram A mammogram is a picture of the insides of your breast. The pictures are made using x-rays. A computer combines the x-rays to make detailed pictures. A bilateral mammogram includes pictures of both breasts. Mammogram results are used to plan treatment. Diagnostic mammograms look at specific areas of your breasts, which may not be clearly seen on screening mammograms. They are used to see tumor and the size of the tumor(s). Diagnostic mammograms include extra compression in certain areas of the breast, magnification views, or rolling the breast to image additional areas of the breast. Other tests may include a breast MRI or ultrasound. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist if you have any metal in your body. During the test, you will likely be asked to hold your breath for 10 to 20 seconds as the technician collects the images. Contrast is often used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. Breast MRI If needed, a breast MRI will be used in addition to a mammogram. Contrast should be used. You will be positioned face down in the machine with your arms above your head. Spine and brain MRI An MRI can be used to detect breast cancer that has spread (metastasize) to your spine or brain. For a brain MRI, a device is placed around your head. For a spine MRI, no device is worn. Contrast should be used in an MRI. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past, especially to iodine or to shellfish such as shrimp. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple -rays will be taken. A computer combines the -rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days. Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammography or 3-dimensional (3D) mammograms known as tomosynthesis. might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET-CT scan. It may be done with one or two machines depending on the cancer center. Sodium fluoride PET-CT A sodium fluoride PET-CT might be used instead of a bone scan. In this test, the radiotracer is made of sodium fluoride. FDG PET-CT An FDG PET-CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET-CT may not be needed. FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. FES PET-CT FES is a radioactive form of the hormone estrogen. It might be used instead of FDG PET-CT when cancer is estrogen receptorpositive . Inflammatory breast cancer can be difficult to diagnose. Ask for a referral to a breast specialist, if possible. Ultrasound An ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your bare breast using gel. It may also be placed below your armpit. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, a breast ultrasound or MRI is used to guide a biopsy. Biopsy A biopsy is a procedure that removes a sample of tissue or fluid. The sample is sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment. There are different types of biopsies. Some biopsies are guided using imaging, such as mammogram, ultrasound, or MRI. The primary or main tumor is biopsied first. Other tumors or tumors in different areas may also be biopsied. You may have tissue removed from the breast, lymph nodes, or both. Types of possible biopsies include: Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) or core biopsy (CB) uses needles of different sizes to remove a sample of tissue or fluid. In a vacuum-assisted core biopsy (VACB), suction is used to remove the sample with a special vacuum device. Incisional biopsy removes a small amount of tissue through a cut in the skin or body. Excisional biopsy removes the entire abnormal area. This is not the preferred type of biopsy but may be necessary if other methods are not possible or when the biopsy results don’t match the expected findings. Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine. A core needle biopsy (CNB) removes more than one tissue sample, but usually through the same area on the breast. The samples are small. Biopsy In a biopsy, a sample of tumor is removed. There are different types of biopsy. This image shows an ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. The needle is often guided into the tumor with imaging. When mammography is used during a biopsy, it is called a stereotactic needle biopsy. One or more clips may be placed near the breast tumor during a biopsy. The clips are small, painless, and made of metal. They will mark the site for future treatment and imaging. The clips will stay in place until surgery. If the area biopsied is benign, the clip will remain in place to mark the biopsy site on future imaging. The clips cause no problems, even if they are left in place for a long time. You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies. You may need to rest and place an ice pack on the biopsy area after the procedure. If you are working or have other commitments, you may want to take the day off to recover emotionally and physically from the experience. Axillary lymph node needle biopsy An axillary lymph node (ALN) drains lymph fluid from the breast and nearby areas. In an axillary lymph node biopsy, a sample of lymph node near the armpit (axilla) is biopsied with a needle. This is to determine if abnormal lymph nodes seen on imaging tests contain cancer cells. An ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (US-FNA) or core biopsy will be used. If cancer is found, it is called node positive (node+). A marker may be placed in the node so that it can be identified later if needed. Standard of care is the best known way to treat particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Sentinel lymph node biopsy A sentinel lymph node (SLN) is the first lymph node that cancer cells are most likely to spread to from a primary tumor. Sometimes, there can be more than one sentinel lymph node. Removal of the sentinel lymph nodes during surgery is called a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB or SNB). This procedure is done during surgery such as a mastectomy (surgery to remove the breast) or lumpectomy (surgery to remove the tumor) to determine if any cancer cells have traveled to the lymph nodes. The lymph nodes removed are called the sentinel nodes. They may or may not contain any cancer cells. Just because these nodes are removed, it does not mean that they are positive for cancer. To find the sentinel lymph nodes, a radioactive material and other dyes are injected into the area where breast tumor is located. From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes. This helps the surgeon find which of the nodes are the sentinel lymph nodes. Once the nodes are found, those containing the radioactive material or dye are removed and tested by a pathologist. If cancer is found, then more than the sentinel lymph nodes may be removed. Skin biopsy A sample of inflamed skin on the breast will likely be removed to diagnose inflammatory breast cancer. Biopsy results Histology is the study of the anatomy (structure) of cells, tissues, and organs under a microscope. It is used to make treatment decisions. Your pathology report will contain information about histology. You may be recommended to have an open biopsy (surgery) to remove (excise) the tumor to confirm histology. Talk to your health care provider for more information on next steps. Hormone receptor status A hormone is a substance made by a gland in your body. Your blood carries hormones throughout your body. A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell. Hormones recognize and bind to specific hormone receptors. When hormones attach to receptors on breast cancer cells, they can cause cancer to grow. If found, these receptors may be targeted using endocrine therapy. There are 2 types of hormone receptors: Estrogen – plays a role in breast development Progesterone – plays a role in menstrual cycle and pregnancy Hormone receptor (HR) testing should be done on any new tumors. A biopsy sample will be used. Hormone receptor-positive In hormone receptor-positive breast cancer, IHC finds estrogen and/or progesterone hormone receptors. Most breast cancers are . Estrogen receptor (ER) is stimulated by estrogen and provides survival and proliferation (rapid growth) signals. Cancer cells deprived of estrogen or which have their ER signal blocked with treatment may stop growing or die. Progesterone receptor (PR) binds progesterone and also provides survival and proliferation signals. It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling. Hormone receptor-negative Hormone receptor-negative (HR-) breast cancer cells do not have either estrogen or progesterone hormone receptors. These cancers are sometimes simply called hormone negative. HR- cancers often grow faster than cancers. Both the estrogen and progesterone receptors need to be negative for the cancer to be considered HR-. Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells In breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in at least 1 out of every 100 cancer cells. In ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in 1 to 10 out of every 100 cancer cells. Endocrine therapy might not be recommended for ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer. HER2 status Inflammatory breast cancers often produce greater than normal amounts of HERHuman epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a protein involved in normal cell growth. It is found on the surface of all cells. When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive . You might hear it called HER2 overexpression or amplification. There are 2 tests for HER2: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measures receptors. If the IHC score is , the cancer is . If the score is 0 or 1, it is considered HER2-. If the score is , further testing is needed. In situ hybridization (ISH) counts the number of copies of the HER2 gene. This test is done mainly when the IHC score is unclear. HER2 testing should be done on all new tumors. A tumor biopsy sample will be used. You might have more than one HER2 test. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. These cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC can find estrogen, progesterone, and HER2 receptors in breast cancer cells. A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell. Biomarker testing A sample from a biopsy of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations/alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: BRCA. Genes are written with italics like this: BRCA. HER2 and hormone receptor status are part of biomarker testing. Your treatment team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Tumor markers Your blood or biopsy tissue may be tested for proteins. Examples of some tumor markers in breast cancer include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 15-3, and CA An increase in the level of certain tumor markers could mean that the cancer has grown or spread (progressed). However, not everyone has elevated levels of these markers and tumor markers alone are not a reliable method of detecting breast cancer. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). TMB-H can be used to help predict response to cancer treatment using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing A sample of your tumor or blood may be used to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Certain mutations such as PIK3CA can be targeted with specific therapies. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations for changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-1 and PD-L1 testing Programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) are immune proteins. If either protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. If your cancer expresses either protein, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and a checkpoint inhibitor therapy. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a testing method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA, the genetic material in a person’s cells. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cancer or immune cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a highthroughput method used to determine the DNA sequence or gene changes of cancer cells in your tumor. This method would only be used if enough tumor tissue remains after other biomarker testing has been completed. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a lab process that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies called PCR product might be used for NGS. Genetic risk testing About 1 out of 10 breast cancers are hereditary. Depending on your family history or other features of your cancer, your health care provider might refer you for hereditary genetic testing to learn more about your cancer. A genetic counselor or trained provider will speak to you about the results. Tests results may be used to guide treatment planning. Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva (spitting into a cup or a cheek swab). The goal is to look for gene mutations inherited from your biological parents called germline mutations. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. You can pass these genes on to your children. Also, other family members might carry these mutations. Tell your care team if there is a family history of cancer. BRCA tests Everyone has BRCA genes. Normal BRCA genes help to prevent tumor growth. They help fix damaged cells and help cells grow normally. BRCA mutations put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. Mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 increase the risk of breast, ovarian, prostate, colorectal, pancreatic, and melanoma skin cancers. Mutated BRCA genes can also affect how well some treatments work. These tests might be repeated. What is your family cancer health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from biological parent to child. This information is called a family health history. Ask blood relatives about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who were diagnosed with cancer, ask them (or other relatives if they are no longer living) what type of cancer they had, if they died from the cancer, and at what age the cancer was diagnosed. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, nieces and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed? What is our family's ancestry - from what countries did our ancestors originate? Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis may sometimes be stressful and may cause distress. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. More information on distress can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. ECOG PS The ECOG PS scores range from 0 to PS 0 means the person is fully active. PS 1 means the person is still able to perform light to moderate activity, but with some limitations. PS 2 means the person is limited to the chair or bed less than half of the time and is still able to care for self. PS 3 means the person is limited to the chair or bed more than half of the time. PS 4 means the person is totally confined to the bed or chair and completely unable to care for self. PS 5 means the person is not alive. In breast cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor. Good PS is usually PS 0 or PS Key points Tests are used to find cancer, plan treatment, and check how well treatment is working. You will have a physical exam, including a breast exam, to see if anything feels or looks abnormal. Treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. h A diagnostic mammogram includes detailed pictures of both breasts. It is different than a screening mammogram. During a biopsy, tissue or fluid samples are removed for testing. Samples are needed to confirm the presence of cancer and to perform cancer cell tests. A sample from a biopsy of your tumor will be tested for estrogen receptor (ER) status, progesterone receptor (PR) status, HER2 status, and grade (histology). This provides information about the behavior of your cancer, as well as treatments to which your cancer may respond. About 1 out of 10 breast cancers are hereditary. Depending on your family history or other features of your cancer, your health care provider might refer you for hereditary genetic testing or to speak with a genetic counselor. h A sentinel lymph node (SLN) is the first lymph node(s) that cancer cells are most likely to spread to from a primary tumor. A sentinel lymph node biopsy (SNLB) might be done to look for cancer in your lymph node(s). Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Testing takes time. It might take days or weeks before all test results come in. 3 Breast cancer staging How breast cancer is staged TNM scores Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. It also takes into account hormone receptor and HER2 status. Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. At diagnosis, IBC is stage 3 or 4 disease. In stage 3, the tumor can be any size and in the lymph nodes, the lymph nodes can be fixed (or not moveable), or the cancer can involve the skin or chest wall. It is sometimes called advanced disease. In stage 4, cancer has spread to other parts of the body (metastasized). How breast cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage. Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM plus tumor grade and the status of the biomarkers such as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR). Prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic. Pathologic stage applies to those who have undergone surgery as the initial treatment for breast cancer. Breast cancer staging is often done twice, before and after surgery. Staging after surgery provides more specific and accurate details about the size of the cancer and lymph node status. Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is based on a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. An example might look like cN2 or cM Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery. An example might be pNIf you are given drug therapy before surgery, then the stage might look like ypT Staging is based on a combination of information to reach a final numbered stage. Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next. Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Estrogen receptor (ER) status: Does the cancer have the protein called an estrogen receptor? Progesterone receptor (PR) status: Does the cancer have the protein called a progesterone receptor? Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status: Does the cancer make too much of a protein called HER2? Grade of the cancer (G): How much do the cancer cells look like normal cells? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes, proteins, markers, or mutations that might suggest treatment? TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage breast cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on cancer test results, your doctor will assign a score or number to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage. A TNM example might look like this: T3N2M0 or T32, N2, M T (tumor) – Depth and spread of the main (primary) tumor(s) in one or both breasts N (node) – If cancer has spread to nearby (regional) lymph nodes M (metastasis) -– If cancer has spread to distant parts of the body or metastasized T Tumor The primary tumor size can be measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). One inch is equal to . A large pea is 1 cm . A golf ball is 4 cm . A tumor micrometastasis is a very small collection of cancerous cells smaller than 1 mm. It might be written as T1mi. Ipsilateral means on the same side of the body. T1 Tumor is 2 cm or less T2 Tumor is 1 cm to 5 cm T3 Tumor is more than 5 cm T4 Tumor is of any size and has invaded nearby structures such as the chest wall and skin of the breast • T4d Tumor is inflammatory carcinoma (inflammatory breast cancer) Regional lymph node Lymph, a clear fluid containing cells that help fight infections and other diseases, drains through channels into lymphatic vessels. From here, lymph drains into lymph nodes. There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. Regional lymph nodes are those located near the tumor in the breast. If breast cancer spreads, it often goes first to nearby lymph nodes under the arm. It can also sometimes spread to lymph nodes near the collarbone or near the breastbone. Knowing if the cancer has spread to your lymph nodes helps doctors find the best way to treat your cancer. N0 means no cancer is in the regional lymph nodes. Isolated tumor cells (ITCs) may be present. These are malignant cell clusters no larger than . N1mi means micrometastases (approximately 200 cells, larger than , but not larger than ) are found in lymph nodes. N1, N2, N3 means regional lymph node metastases are found. The higher the number, the more lymph nodes that have metastases. M Metastasis Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is shown as MThis is metastatic breast cancer (MBC). The most common sites for metastasis are bone and lung. M0 means no evidence of distant metastasis. M1 means distant metastasis is found. This is metastatic breast cancer. Clinical staging Clinical staging of lymph nodes is staging before surgery. Cancer is in axillary nodes Cancer is in internal mammary nodes Cancer is in infraclavicular nodes Cancer is in supraclavicular nodes Grade Grade describes how abnormal the tumor cells look under a microscope (called histology). Higher-grade cancers tend to grow and spread faster than lower-grade cancers. GX means the grade can’t be determined, followed by G1, G2, and GG3 is the highest grade for breast cancers. A low-grade tumor has a low risk of recurrence. A high-grade tumor has a higher risk of recurrence (of cancer returning). GX – Grade cannot be determined G1 – Low h G2 – Intermediate G3 – High Numbered stages Numbered stages are based on TNM scores and receptor (hormone and HER2) status. Stages range from stage 0 to stage 4, with 4 being the most advanced. They might be written as stage 0, stage I, stage II, stage III, and stage IV. Stage 0 is noninvasive Noninvasive breast cancer is rated stage Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is found only in the ducts (Tis). It has not spread to the surrounding breast tissue, lymph nodes (N0) or distant sites (M0). Stages 1, 2, and 3 are invasive Invasive breast cancer is rated stage 1, 2, or It has grown outside the ducts, lobules, or breast skin. Cancer might be in the axillary lymph nodes. Stage 4 is metastatic In stage 4 breast cancer, cancer has spread to distant sites. It can develop from earlier stages. Sometimes, the first diagnosis is stage 4 metastatic breast cancer (called de novo). More information on metastatic breast cancer is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage breast cancer. Breast cancer is often staged twice, before and after surgery. Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is written as cTNM. Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery. It is written as pTNM. Grade describes how abnormal the tumor cells look under a microscope (called histology). Regional lymph nodes are found near the breast. Keep copies of your pathology reports. The pathology report might include a lot of abbreviations such as pN0(mol+), ypT2, or cNAsk your care team to explain what they mean. 4 Treating IBC Care team 39 Immunotherapy Treatment overview 40 Endocrine therapy Mastectomy 42 Bone-strengthening therapy Radiation therapy 43 Clinical trials Chemotherapy 45 Supportive care Myeloid growth factors 46 Side effects HER2-targeted therapy 49 Key points Inhibitors This chapter provides an overview of treatment options and what to expect. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for you. Care team Treating breast cancer takes a team approach. Treatment decisions should involve a multidisciplinary team (MDT). An MDT is a team of health care and psychosocial care professionals from different professional backgrounds who have knowledge (expertise) and experience in your type of cancer. This team is united in the planning and implementing of your treatment. Ask who will coordinate your care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout cancer treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, the care team might include the following: h A diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, ultrasounds, and other imaging tests. An interventional radiologist performs needle biopsies and places intravenous (IV) ports for treatment. A pathologist analyzes the cells and tissues removed during a biopsy and provides cancer diagnosis, staging, and information about biomarker testing. A surgical oncologist performs operations to remove cancer. h A reconstructive (plastic) surgeon performs breast reconstruction, if desired, for those who undergo mastectomy. A medical oncologist treats cancer in adults using systemic therapy. h A radiation oncologist prescribes and delivers radiation therapy to treat cancer. An anesthesiologist gives anesthesia, a medicine so you do not feel pain during surgery or procedures. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Oncology pharmacists are experts in knowing how to use medicines to treat cancer and to manage symptoms and side effects. Palliative care nurses, advanced practice providers (APPs), and physicians help provide an extra layer of support with cancer-related care. Radiation therapists provide your hands-on delivery of radiotherapy treatments. Nutritionists and dietitians can provide guidance on what foods are most suitable for your condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who can help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that can affect how you think and feel. Social workers help people solve and cope with problems in their everyday lives. Clinical social workers also diagnose and treat mental, behavioral, and emotional issues. The anxiety a person feels when diagnosed with cancer might be managed by a social worker in some cancer centers. They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses. A research team helps to collect research data and coordinate care if you are in a clinical trial. Clinical trials help bring new therapies to patients and advance the treatment for everyone. Consider asking your care team about access to clinical trials. Your physical, mental, and emotional wellbeing are important. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need What is working and what is not Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Treatment overview Inflammatory breast cancer is treatable. Treatment can be local, systemic, or usually a combination of both. Local therapy focuses on the breast, chest wall, and lymph node area. It includes: Mastectomy (surgery) Radiation therapy Systemic therapy works throughout the body. It includes: Chemotherapy HER2-targeted therapy Inhibitors Immunotherapy Endocrine therapy For a list of systemic therapies, see Guide IBC is treated with systemic therapy to shrink the tumor, followed by surgery to remove the breast and lymph nodes, and then radiation therapy. Surgery is not always possible. Even though surgery might not be an option, systemic therapy will continue. Systemic treatment is based on estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and HER2 expression. It is important to have regular talks with your care team about your goals for treatment and your treatment plan. There are many treatment options. However, not everyone will respond to treatment in the same way. Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy. In a modified radical mastectomy, the breast and underarm (axilla) sentinel lymph nodes are removed. Before removing the breast, the surgeon may do a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). Sentinel lymph nodes are the first lymph nodes cancer cells are likely to have spread from the primary tumor. Breast reconstruction is an option after a mastectomy. If you opt for reconstruction, it will be done after finishing cancer treatment. This is called delayed reconstruction. Breast reconstruction is often done in stages. You might want to consult with a plastic surgeon. When preparing for surgery, seek the opinion of an experienced surgeon. The surgeon should be an expert in performing your type of surgery. Hospitals that perform many surgeries often have better results. You can ask for a referral to a hospital or cancer center that has experience in treating your type of cancer. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation therapy can be given alone or before or after surgery to treat or slow the growth of cancer. Sometimes, radiation is given with certain systemic therapies. It may be used as supportive care to help ease pain or discomfort caused by cancer. Most types of radiation include several short treatment Modified radical mastectomy The dotted line shows where the entire breast and some lymph nodes are removed. Part of the chest wall muscle may also be removed. sessions that are given once daily over a few days to weeks. Ask your care team which radiation option(s) are best for you and what side effects to expect. Radiation may be given to the chest wall, infraclavicular region (below the collarbone), supraclavicular area (above the collarbone), or lymph nodes found in the axillary bed (armpit). Lymph node radiation therapy is also called regional nodal irradiation (RNI) External beam radiation therapy External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) uses a machine outside of the body called a linear accelerator (linac) to aim radiation at the whole breast (WBRT) and lymph nodes (RNI). Chemotherapy Systemic therapy is drug therapy that works throughout the body. It is used before surgery to shrink the tumor or reduce the amount of cancer (called cancer burden). Preoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given before surgery. It is also called neoadjuvant therapy. Postoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given after surgery. It is also called adjuvant therapy. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and some normal cells. More than one chemotherapy may be used to treat inflammatory breast cancer. When only one drug is used, it’s called a single agent. A combination or multi-agent regimen is the use of two or more chemotherapy drugs. Warnings about supplements and drug interactions You might be asked to stop taking or avoid certain herbal supplements when on a systemic therapy. Some supplements can affect the ability of a drug to do its job. This is called a drug interaction. It is critical to speak with your care team about any supplements you may be taking. Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary. Myeloid growth factors Certain chemotherapies can reduce the cells that fight infection. Treatments with myeloid growth factors (MGFs) can help increase the number of white blood cells and prevent infections. More information on myeloid growth factors, can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Anemia and Neutropenia, at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. HER2-targeted therapy HER2 is a protein involved in normal cell growth. There might be higher amounts of HER2 in your breast cancer. If this is the case, it is called HER2-positive breast cancer. HER2-targeted therapy is drug therapy that treats HER2 breast cancer. Most often, HER2-targeted therapy is given with chemotherapy. However, it might be used alone or in combination with endocrine therapy. HER2-targeted therapies include: HER2 antibodies prevent growth signals from HER2 from outside the cell. They also increase the attack of immune cells on cancer cells. HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen. PARP inhibitors Cancer cells often become damaged. PARP is a cell protein that repairs cancer cells and allows them to survive. Blocking PARP can cause cancer cells to die. Olaparib (Lynparza) and talazoparib (Talzenna) are PARP inhibitors. You must have the BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and your breast cancer must be HER2- for PARP inhibitors to be considered. Did you know? The terms “chemotherapy” and “systemic therapy” are often used interchangeably, but they are not the same. Systemic therapy works throughout the body and includes chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, endocrine therapy, and others. PIK3CA inhibitor The PIK3CA gene is one of the most frequently mutated genes in breast cancers. A mutation in this gene can lead to increased growth of cancer cells and resistance to various treatments. Alpelisib (Piqray) is an example of a PIK3CA inhibitor. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches. Tumors take advantage of "off switches." Two leading off switches are PD-1 and CTLAImmunotherapy can be given alone or with other types of treatment. An immunotherapy example is pembrolizumab (Keytruda). Endocrine therapy Endocrine therapy blocks estrogen or progesterone to treat hormone receptorpositive breast cancer. The endocrine system is made up of organs and tissues that produce hormones. Hormones are natural chemicals released into the bloodstream. There are 4 hormones that might be targeted in endocrine therapy: Estrogen is made mainly by the ovaries, and also by other tissues in the body such as the fat tissue. Progesterone is made mainly by the ovaries. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) is made by a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. It tells the ovaries to make estrogen and progesterone and testicles to make testosterone. LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow. Endocrine therapy will stop your body from making hormones or it will block what hormones do in the body. This can slow tumor growth or shrink the tumor for a period of time. Endocrine therapy is sometimes called hormone therapy. It is not the same as hormone replacement therapy used for menopause. There is one type of surgical endocrine therapy: Bilateral oophorectomy is surgery to remove both ovaries. Other main types of endocrine therapy include: Ovarian ablation uses radiation to permanently stop the ovaries from making hormones. Ovarian suppression uses drugs to temporarily stop the ovaries from making hormones. It is achieved with drugs called LHRH agonists. These drugs stop LHRH from being made, which stops the ovaries from making hormones. LHRH agonists include goserelin (Zoladex) and leuprolide (Lupron Depot). Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. h Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) stop a type of hormone called androgen from changing into estrogen by interfering with an enzyme called aromatase. They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone. Menstrual periods may stop during treatment (called amenorrhea) and for up to 2 years after treatment, but often return in those 35 years of age and under. Endocrine therapy
