What is primary CNS lymphoma? What causes primary CNS lymphoma? How is primary CNS lymphoma diagnosed? Can primary CNS lymphoma be cured? What’s next? Key points Being diagnosed with a brain tumor can be frightening and overwhelming. This book will help you make sense of all the information that’s out there. It will also describe your options for treatment. Taken together, you’ll have the confidence to make wellinformed decisions. What is primary CNS lymphoma? Primary central nervous system lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that affects the central nervous system (CNS). Let’s break it down word by word to understand it better: Primary – Primary means first. When talking about cancer, primary refers to the place where cancer first started. Primary CNS lymphoma starts in the central nervous system. Central nervous system – The CNS is made up of the brain and spinal cord. Primary CNS lymphoma occurs more often in the brain than in the spinal cord, but it can also involve the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Lymphoma – Lymphoma is cancer that forms from lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. So, a lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth of lymphocytes. Now let’s put it all together: Primary CNS lymphoma is a cancer that begins when lymphocytes in the brain and spinal cord grow out of control. Primary CNS lymphoma starts in lymphocytes in the immune system. The immune system is your body’s natural defense against infection and disease. Having an impaired immune system may increase the risk of developing this cancer. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas within the nervous system. For example, it may spread from the brain to the eyes. But it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. However, a different kind of lymphoma—called secondary CNS lymphoma—starts in another part of the body but then spreads to the brain or spinal cord. This book is only about primary CNS lymphoma. What is the CNS? The central nervous system (CNS) receives signals from your senses, processes information, and controls your body’s responses. The CNS includes: The brain, which controls functions of the body such as feeling, moving, thinking, and learning. The eyes are connected directly to the brain and are also part of the CNS. h The spinal cord, which transmits messages between the brain and the body. Because the CNS is so important, your body has parts that protect it. These include: Meninges, which are membranes that cover your brain and spinal cord. Cerebrospinal fluid, which is a liquid that surrounds your brain and spinal cord. h Bones including the skull that shields your brain and the vertebrae that surround your spinal cord. What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it. Although no one knows exactly what causes a lymphoma, we do know that lymphomas often start with a genetic abnormality (mutation) in certain lymphocytes. This abnormality causes these lymphocytes to grow out of control (become cancerous). The abnormality occurs on its own. It’s not a mutation that occurs in other cells or organs in your body. And it’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Although primary CNS lymphoma is rare, it could happen to almost anyone. However, some people with certain risk factors have a greater chance. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. For example, having a reduced immune system increases the risk of developing primary CNS lymphoma. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause a disease (and just because you have risk factors, it doesn’t mean you'll definitely get the disease). But people with primary CNS lymphoma often have one or more of these risk factors: Having an immunodeficiency disorder, which is an illness that weakens the immune system’s ability to fight infections and diseases. Primary CNS lymphoma is frequently linked to HIV, the immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS. Carrying the Epstein-Barr virus, which is the virus that causes mononucleosis (“mono”) and other illnesses. Epstein-Barr is one of the most common viruses in humans. Most people are infected with it. After you’re infected, the virus remains dormant (inactive or “sleeping”) in your body for life. Having an autoimmune disease, such as lupus, in which the immune system overreacts and attacks healthy tissues and organs. Having an organ transplant, which requires medications that suppress the immune system. This leads to a higher risk of infections. Being an older adult. Although primary CNS lymphoma can occur at any age, the majority of people diagnosed with it are in their 60s or 70s. How is primary CNS lymphoma diagnosed? Primary CNS lymphoma is often found when a person develops symptoms. A symptom is a feeling or problem that may be a sign of disease. Symptoms usually develop over several weeks. Primary CNS lymphoma can cause a variety of symptoms. Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you. If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating lymphomas in the brain. Can primary CNS lymphoma be cured? Curing primary CNS lymphoma is rare, but it may be possible if it’s diagnosed early and treated immediately. Sometimes the bigger problem is managing the major side effects of the intense treatment. People who are younger, healthier, and more physically fit have a better chance for a cure. In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down its growth and reduce its symptoms for a period of time, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Joining a clinical trial of a potential new therapy is another recommended option. Treatment may be able to put primary CNS lymphoma into remission. Remission means there are no symptoms or signs of cancer. Remission may last for months or years. However, even with the best treatment, primary CNS lymphoma often comes back (relapses) in the brain, spinal cord, or the eye. It’s true that primary CNS lymphoma is fatal for some patients. Anyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma has a difficult road ahead. Still, there’s hope. In the past few years, improved detection methods have shortened the time to diagnosis and led to better outcomes, even in people with weakened immune systems. Therapies specifically designed to treat primary CNS lymphoma are currently being studied in clinical trials. The number of these trials has increased in recent years, offering more hope to people living with this disease. What’s next? This chapter provides only a brief overview of primary CNS lymphoma. The next chapters explain: Tests needed to diagnose the disease Different treatment options and what they do Which treatment options are right for you What happens after treatment Thoughts on next steps 66 Don’t Google your diagnosis and assume that statistics define your life! Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different. My motto is to ‘live fearlessly’ and ignore those fears the internet can give you." In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma's growth, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. Key points Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. A lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth (cancer) of lymphocytes. Primary CNS lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that most often affects the brain. But it can also occur in the spinal cord, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas in the nervous system but it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. h A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Having an impaired immune system is a risk factor for developing primary CNS lymphoma. h A lymphoma located in the central part of the brain can cause leg or arm weakness, coordination or movement difficulties, changes in personality or behavior, memory problems, and other symptoms. If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain lymphomas. Not everyone with primary CNS lymphoma can be cured, but all can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma’s growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Another recommended option is receiving treatment in a clinical trial. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with lymphoma in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with primary CNS lymphoma can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can. Start with the online resources listed in the back of this book. 2 Tests for primary CNS Tests for diagnosis Tests after diagnosis What’s next? Key points Different tests are needed to identify primary CNS lymphoma and to make a treatment plan. The key to confirming the diagnosis is removing a small sample of the tumor tissue and testing it. Many diseases have signs and symptoms similar to primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma, including neurological illnesses and other types of brain cancer. So it’s important to have tests to confirm your diagnosis. If you're given a diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll have more tests to find out how far the cancer extends within the central nervous system or if it has spread to another area of the body. Tests are also used to help plan your treatment. Tests for diagnosis If you haven’t yet been diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll first have a physical examination and some general assessments of your health. These include a neurological exam and an evaluation of your level of activity. After these, you’ll have imaging scans and one or more biopsies. Neurological exam This exam involves some simple tests to check your alertness, balance, coordination, reflexes, hearing, and other senses. Your doctor may also perform an eye exam to look at the health of the nerves in the back of your eye. Performance status Your care team will want to know how well you can do ordinary day-to-day activities—like taking a walk, climbing stairs, cooking dinner, carrying laundry, or taking a bath or shower. This evaluation is called performance status. The more activities you can do, the better your performance status. Your care team uses this evaluation to get a sense of the level of treatment you may be able to handle and whether you may be eligible for a clinical trial. Imaging Imaging tests take pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images show areas in the body that might have cancer. The images can reveal a lymphoma’s location, size, and other features. MRI Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most useful imaging technique for identifying primary CNS lymphoma. An MRI scan is good at showing the spine and soft tissues, including the brain, as well as other details that are helpful for planning surgery. MRI uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. During an MRI, you’ll lie on a table that slides into the scanning machine. (An open MRI scanner may be an option at some health care centers.) It’s important to lie still during the test to get the best pictures. The machine makes loud noises but you can wear earplugs. An MRI of the brain or spinal cord usually requires a contrast agent (also called contrast dye or just contrast). Contrast highlights areas in organs, blood vessels, or other tissues to make them easier to see. The contrast is injected into the bloodstream through an intravenous (IV) line before or during the imaging test and later flushed out in urine. The contrast agent used for primary CNS lymphoma is called gadolinium. You’ll have multiple MRI tests throughout diagnosis and treatment. An MRI should be done early on if your symptoms suggest a brain tumor. It’s also used right after treatment to see how well the treatment worked. You’ll have more MRIs during follow-up to watch for any recurrence or new growth. CT If MRI is unavailable or not recommended for you, you might have a computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan instead. A CT scan uses x-rays to take many images of your body from different angles. A computer then combines the pictures to make a 3D image. After imaging After the MRI or CT scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist, an expert in analyzing images of the nervous system. The radiologist will convey the imaging results to your care team. This information helps your team plan what the next steps of your care should be. If your imaging results suggest a primary CNS lymphoma, the next step is a biopsy. MRI of the brain Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most useful imaging technique for identifying primary CNS lymphoma. It’s important to lie still during the test to get the best images. Straps or other devices may help you avoid moving. Biopsy If imaging scans show something that may be a primary CNS lymphoma, your care providers will want to take a sample and test it. A procedure that removes a small piece of tissue for testing is called a biopsy. Getting a biopsy is the only way to be certain that you have cancer. A biopsy also gives your care team clues on how to treat it. The standard method for diagnosing primary CNS lymphoma is a stereotactic biopsy. It’s the recommended procedure when a brain tumor is in a hard-to-reach or vital area. It aims to remove only enough of the tumor to make a diagnosis. A stereotactic biopsy is done by a neurosurgeon in an operating room. First, you’ll be fitted with a frame or several tiny markers around your head to aid the surgery. Next, you’ll be given anesthesia to go to sleep. A small area of your hair will be shaved down to the scalp. The neurosurgeon will then make a little opening in your skull and insert a thin, hollow needle into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. A computerized navigation system, connected to MRI or CT imaging, will allow the surgeon to target and remove the sample with a high degree of precision. After removal, the opening in your scalp will be closed with sutures and you’ll be able to go home. What an MRI shows An MRI scan highlights primary CNS lymphoma in the brain. People with primary CNS lymphoma may have one or multiple tumors appear on their scan. Image: Stephanie E. Weiss, MD, FASTRO The tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis. A specialist called a pathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope. If the tissue is cancerous, the pathologist will identify the type and grade of the cancer. The testing process will take about a week to complete. If stereotactic biopsy is unavailable at your hospital or medical center, ask to be referred to a specialized center where it can be performed. Take our survey, and help make the NCCN Guidelines for Patients better for everyone! NCCN.org/patients/comments Stereotactic biopsy A stereotactic biopsy is needed to diagnose primary CNS lymphoma. In this procedure, a thin, hollow needle is inserted into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. The sample is sent to a lab to be tested for cancer cells. Tests after diagnosis After an MRI scan and a stereotactic biopsy have confirmed a diagnosis of lymphoma in the central nervous system, a few more tests are needed to find out how far the cancer has grown in the CNS and if it may have spread to other areas of the body. Although many people with primary CNS lymphoma have only one visible tumor, others have multiple tumors on their scan. Testing after diagnosis also checks for signs of cancer in the eyes, cerebrospinal fluid, blood, chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and possibly the bone marrow and testicles. These tests include: Eye exam Your eyes are connected directly to the brain by the optic nerves. So primary CNS lymphoma doesn’t travel far to spread from the brain to the eyes. (Very rarely it starts in the eyes and spreads to the brain.) If lymphoma occurs in the eye, it often forms in the back of the eye, called the retina. The retina converts what you see into signals, which it sends through the optic nerves to the brain. Lymphoma cells can also invade the vitreous, the clear gel that fills the eye. When primary CNS lymphoma involves the eyes, it’s called vitreoretinal lymphoma. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye exam. This is done at an eye doctor’s office using a slit lamp, a microscope with a bright light. You’ll first be given drops in your eyes to widen (dilate) your pupils. This gives the eye doctor a better view inside your eyes. The eye doctor will use the lamp’s bright light to examine the retina, optic nerve, and other parts of your eyes. If the vitreous looks unusual or you have visual symptoms, you may need a biopsy of the vitreous. For this procedure (called CNS lymphoma in the eye Primary CNS lymphoma can occur in the brain, the spinal cord, and sometimes in the eyes. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye examination. Here, an ophthalmologist uses a special microscope called a slit lamp to take a close-up look at a patient’s eye. a vitrectomy), your eye is first numbed with anesthetic. Then a thin needle is inserted into the eye. The needle removes a tiny amount of vitreous, which is then tested for cancer cells. In some cases, a vitrectomy alone can confirm the diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma without the need for brain biopsy. Lumbar puncture A lumbar puncture (also called a spinal tap) is a procedure that removes a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for testing. CSF is a liquid that flows in and around the hollow areas in the brain and spinal cord. This fluid protects and nourishes the central nervous system. Testing the CSF can help confirm a diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma. Testing also provides other helpful information needed for planning treatment. A lumbar puncture is done only if it can be performed safely and it won’t delay treatment. If cancer cells are found in the spinal fluid, or if you’re having symptoms, another MRI may be needed to find out if there are any lesions in the spine. Lumbar puncture Cancer cells in the spinal fluid may or may not cause symptoms. A lumbar puncture is used to learn whether cancer has spread to the spinal cord. First, the lower back is numbed. Then a long, thin needle is inserted into the lower part of the spinal column to remove cerebrospinal fluid. The fluid is then sent to a lab for testing. More imaging It’s uncommon for primary CNS lymphoma to spread outside of the central nervous system or the eyes. Still, it’s important to have a look at the rest of your body just to be sure. The imaging methods most commonly used for this are positron emission tomography (PET) and/ or computed tomography (CT). PET imaging uses a small amount of a radioactive drug to find cancer cells in the body. After the radioactive drug is injected into a vein, it causes cancer cells to show up as bright spots on PET scans. A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a single detailed image. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is recommended to look for cancer that has spread to these areas. A contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream before the scan to make the areas of cancer easier to see. Sometimes PET is combined with CT (a PET/ CT scan). PET/CT imaging may be done with one or two machines depending on the cancer center. A PET/CT scan takes images of the whole body to find cancer. Imaging after diagnosis may also include an ultrasound of the testicles. However, if the whole-body PET/CT scan didn’t find anything, then this imaging test may not be needed. Blood tests Blood tests can also help establish the extent of the cancer and provide other information needed for planning your treatment. The following blood tests are recommended: Complete blood count (CBC) is a common blood test that measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. Comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) is a group of 14 different blood tests that provides information about your blood sugar, calcium, and electrolyte levels, and the health of your liver and kidneys. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is an enzyme involved in converting food into energy for the body. An LDH test measures the level of this enzyme. A high level of LDH can be a sign of cell damage caused by cancer or other health problems. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) blood test is needed for everyone with primary CNS lymphoma. HIV that’s related to primary CNS lymphoma requires specialized care and treatment with antiretroviral therapy in addition to cancer treatment. Hepatitis B testing will be necessary if you’re having immunotherapy treatment and you’ve had this virus before (or you’re at risk of getting it). Immunotherapy can “reawaken” the hepatitis B virus and cause illness that interferes with treatment. Bone marrow biopsy Most bones have a spongy center called marrow. The marrow is where new blood cells are made. It’s uncommon to find cancer cells in the bone marrow of people diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma. But if imaging suggests the possibility of lymphoma in the bones, your care team may recommend a bone marrow biopsy. In this procedure, a hollow needle is inserted into the bone (usually at the back of the hip bone) and a sample of marrow is removed. The marrow sample is then sent to a lab for testing. What’s next? After you’ve been diagnosed and have gone through further testing to find out the extent of your lymphoma, your treatment team will discuss your results with you. You’ll also talk about your choices for treatment. The next chapter explains the different options for treating primary CNS lymphoma. Don’t dismiss your distress Depression, anxiety, and distress are very common in people with cancer (and their caregivers, too). About 1 in 3 patients with primary brain tumors develop clinical depression and anxiety at some point. Up to 3 out of 4 people with primary brain tumors experience psychological distress. Tell your treatment team if you’re feeling stressed or overwhelmed. Ask them for help. You don’t have to cope with it by yourself. Read more about cancer and distress in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Distress During Cancer Care, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points A biopsy is the main test to diagnose primary CNS lymphoma. Imaging tests take pictures that show areas in the body that might have cancer as well as the extent of the disease. A biopsy is a procedure that removes a small piece of a tumor, which is tested for cancer cells. The standard biopsy method for diagnosing primary CNS lymphoma is a stereotactic biopsy. A stereotactic biopsy is a precise technique that’s used when a brain tumor is in a hard-to-reach or vital area. After primary CNS lymphoma is diagnosed, more tests are needed to find out how far the cancer has grown and if it has spread to any other area of the body. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye examination to look for lymphoma in the eyes. A lumbar puncture is a procedure that removes a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid, which is tested for cancer cells. HIV that’s related to primary CNS lymphoma requires specialized therapy in addition to cancer treatment. So everyone with primary CNS lymphoma needs to have an HIV blood test. List all your drugs and supplements Your treatment team will ask you to write a list of all the prescription drugs you take and how often you take them. Make copies of this list, which you can give to the many other providers or specialists you may see. Also be sure to tell your treatment team if you’re using any over-the-counter medicines (including antacids, aspirin, or NSAIDs like ibuprofen) or supplements, vitamins, or herbs. Some of these can interfere with your cancer treatment. For example, some supplements or herbs can raise or lower the levels of chemotherapy drugs in your body. This may cause more side effects or make your treatment less effective. 3 Treatment options Clinical trial Steroids Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Targeted therapy Immunotherapy Stem cell rescue Supportive care What’s next? Key points This chapter lists the different treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma. Ask your care team about the risks and benefits of each option. Together, you and your team can make a treatment plan. There’s no single drug or procedure that’s best for treating primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma. The best treatment is the one that works best for you. Treatment options include corticosteroids, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, and stem cell rescue. Receiving treatment in a clinical trial is also a recommended option. Therapies are often combined to treat cancer. For example, chemotherapy may be given with an immunotherapy drug, or several chemotherapy drugs may be given together. Chemotherapy is also an essential part of having a stem cell rescue. Surgery is not normally an option. Because primary CNS lymphoma usually develops deep within the brain tissue, removing it with surgery is risky and may be more harmful than helpful. Treatment is usually given in phases (which are discussed in the next chapter). Clinical trial NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. Clinical trials are a key way to assess new treatment approaches. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Talk to your treatment team about whether a clinical trial makes sense for you. Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all the treatment options available for their type of cancer, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health. These requirements ensure that participants are alike in certain ways in order to compare how their disease responds to a specific treatment. Informed consent Clinical trials are managed by a group of experts called a research team. The research team will review the study with you in detail, including its purpose and the risks and benefits of joining. All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. This is an agreement that confirms you’ve been fully told about your part in the trial. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or other people you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your treatment team to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all your treatment options. Ask if a clinical trial is available for your situation. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It’s common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You’ll be informed if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There’s no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or childcare due to extra appointments and the costs of routine Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact patient care during the trial. Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard therapy is billed to—and often covered by—insurance. You’re responsible for copays and any costs for this care that aren’t covered by your insurance. NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma should consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. Steroids Corticosteroids (often just called steroids) can shrink lymphomas and decrease swelling in the brain. This can rapidly reduce the signs and symptoms of the lymphoma. However, steroids lose their effectiveness and cause side effects when given long-term. So steroids are only given for a short period of time usually in newly diagnosed patients. Importantly, steroid therapy shouldn’t start until after you have a biopsy and get a diagnosis. This is because steroids can change the appearance of lymphoma cells, making it difficult for the pathologist to reliably diagnose the disease. Side effects of steroids Common side effects of steroids are feeling hungry, trouble sleeping, slow wound healing, upset stomach, mood changes, and swelling in the ankles, feet, and hands. Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that damages and destroys rapidly dividing cells throughout the body. Because cancer cells divide and multiply rapidly, they’re a good target for chemotherapy. But chemotherapy harms healthy cells, too. The damage to healthy cells can cause side effects. Treatment may include a single chemotherapy drug or a combination of drugs. A combination of drugs is sometimes chosen because the drugs work better when they’re used together. Most chemotherapy drugs for primary CNS lymphoma are given intravenously (IV). This means the medicine is slowly infused through a tube into a vein in your arm or another part of your body. The medicine travels in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Some chemotherapy drugs are taken by mouth as a tablet or capsule. Chemotherapy is given in cycles. One cycle involves a few treatment days followed by several days of rest. Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment. Intrathecal chemotherapy If cancer cells are found in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or if an MRI of the spine shows cancer, chemotherapy may be infused directly into the CSF in some cases. This is known as intrathecal or intra-CSF chemotherapy. Intrathecal chemotherapy may be used in select cases or as part of specific treatment program for primary CNS lymphoma. Intraocular chemotherapy In rare cases, primary CNS lymphoma may occur in the eye. In these situations, the chemotherapy may be infused into a vein or directly into the eye. Possible side effects from intraocular chemotherapy include eye irritation, infection, inflammation, and cataracts. Cataracts can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Side effects of chemotherapy Like other therapies, the side effects of chemotherapy depend on many factors. These include the drug, the dose, and the person. Chemotherapy, especially in high doses, may not be the right treatment for people who are frail or older. These individuals may have a difficult time dealing with the harsh side effects. The main chemotherapy drug used to treat primary CNS lymphoma is high-dose methotrexate. Methotrexate is one of the most effective drugs for treating many kinds of cancers. But when given in high doses, methotrexate may cause damage to the kidneys, liver, and other organs. In severe cases, kidney failure is possible. To reduce this risk, you’ll have to stay at the hospital during methotrexate treatment and receive fluids through a vein in your arm. You may also be given medicine to reduce the toxicity of methotrexate and to prevent severe problems in your kidneys and other organs. Many cancer treatments, including chemotherapy, can lead to birth defects. So avoid becoming pregnant or getting someone pregnant while on chemotherapy treatment. Other side effects of chemotherapy include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, mouth sores, loss of appetite, hair loss, low blood cell counts, What about side effects? A side effect is an unhealthy or unpleasant physical or emotional condition caused by treatment. Every treatment for primary CNS lymphoma can cause side effects. Side effects depend on many factors, such as the drug, the amount taken, the length of treatment, and the person. Each person has an individual response to a drug. Some people have many side effects. Others have few. Some side effects can be very serious. Others are not serious but are still unpleasant. Most side effects appear shortly after treatment starts and stop after treatment. Other side effects are long-term or may even appear years later. Your treatment team will monitor your side effects during and after your treatment. Ask your team for a complete list of common and rare side effects of each treatment. If a side effect bothers you, let them know. There may be ways to prevent or avoid some side effects and help you feel better. and feeling very tired or weak (fatigue). Additional side effects are also possible. Medicines are available during chemotherapy treatment to help control most of these side effects. Read more about nausea and vomiting side effects in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Nausea and Vomiting, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Radiation therapy Before effective chemotherapy became available to treat primary CNS lymphoma, radiation therapy was the most commonly used treatment. It’s still an option for treating primary CNS lymphoma in people who can’t have chemotherapy in the first phase of treatment (induction). Another situation in which radiation is sometimes used is in the second phase of treatment (consolidation) to kill cancer cells left over after induction treatment. Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or other radiation to kill cancer cells. Like x-rays used for imaging, you won’t see or feel anything during treatment. The total dose of radiation is usually divided into small doses given over several weeks. By giving a little every day, the radiation damages the tumor while better preserving the healthy tissue. The most commonly used radiation technique for primary CNS lymphoma is treatment of the entire brain, called whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT). Because primary CNS lymphoma can occur in multiple spots anywhere in the brain, WBRT is used to treat the entire brain all at once. WBRT can also reach the upper part of the spine and a part or all of the eyeballs. WBRT even treats microscopic tumors in the CNS that aren’t visible on an MRI scan. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be fitted with a mask or supports to help you keep still. Side effects of radiation therapy Your radiation oncologist will discuss the possible side effects of WBRT. Side effects Radiation therapy Radiation therapy sends beams of intense energy to kill cancer cells. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be fitted with a mask or supports to help you lie still. differ among people. Common side effects include headaches, nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite. Fatigue may begin after the treatment has finished and last for several weeks. Most of these symptoms can be controlled by medications during treatment. Radiation therapy may be more likely to damage the nervous system than chemotherapy, especially in older adults. Months or years after WBRT, patients may develop memory problems, slowed thinking, and trouble speaking. Fine motor skills, such as handwriting or tying shoes, may also be affected. Talk to your treatment team about the benefits of radiation therapy compared with the risk of nervous system damage, including long-term problems with cognition. Radiation therapy for the eyes Radiation therapy is also used to treat primary CNS lymphoma in the eyes. WBRT can be expanded to include the eyes. Or the radiation can be focused only on the eyes but at a lower dose. With either method, usually both eyes are treated at the same time. Possible side effects include vision problems that may be temporary or permanent. Radiation therapy may cause cataracts, for instance, which can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins. This helps your immune system locate and then destroy the cancer cells. Rituximab is given through an IV infusion. Side effects of immunotherapy Rituximab and other immunotherapies may cause drowsiness, fatigue, constipation, joint pain, loss of appetite, low blood cell counts, serious blood clots, and rashes. Keep track of your symptoms and side effects Think about ways to keep track of your symptoms and side effects when they happen. You can make notes in a weekly diary, on a calendar, or in a smartphone app. Or create your own way to record the symptoms or side effects you experience. Some things to track include: Each treatment and any side effects it caused How long the side effect lasted How the side effect affected your quality of life If you’re given a treatment for a side effect, note how well the treatment worked Show this information to your treatment team at each visit. Tracking your side effects gives your care team a better sense of how you’re doing. This can help your providers know how to manage your symptoms better. Stem cell rescue A stem cell is a basic cell that can develop into any kind of cell. Stem cells that become blood cells are called hematopoietic stem cells. Hematopoietic means “blood-forming.” Blood-forming stem cells are made in the bone marrow. But cancer and its treatment can damage and destroy cells in the bone marrow. When hematopoietic stem cells are damaged, they may not supply all the blood cells that the body needs. A stem cell rescue is a way to jumpstart the bone marrow to make more healthy blood cells. Also called a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, stem cell rescue uses your own blood-forming stem cells to regrow your bone marrow. A stem cell rescue has 3 key steps: h Stem cell removal – First, some of your healthy stem cells will be removed from your blood or bone marrow. You may need a few visits to collect enough stem cells. These collected stem cells are then frozen and stored for later. High-dose chemotherapy – Next, you’ll receive intensive chemotherapy to kill any lymphoma cells in your body. The chemotherapy also kills all the stem cells in your bone marrow. Because your blood count will be low, your body will be very vulnerable to infections at this time and you will feel very fatigued. Stem cell replacement – After chemotherapy, your healthy stem cells will be thawed and returned back into your body to “rescue” your damaged bone marrow. Your transplanted stem cells will migrate to the bone marrow and start to grow new blood stem cells. This will also begin to restore your body’s ability to protect itself from infection. You’ll grow back blood cells and bone marrow in a few weeks, but it may take a year for your body to fully recover. During this time, you’ll have frequent blood tests and health checkups until your bone marrow is restored and your blood cell counts return to normal. Stem cell rescue can be an intense procedure. It’s not for everyone with primary CNS lymphoma. And it’s only used after you’ve had other treatments or if the lymphoma comes back after earlier treatment (relapse). Your treatment team will consider many factors to decide if a stem cell rescue is right for you. Some of these factors include your fitness level, health status, organ function, cancer stage, previous treatments, other medical conditions, available supportive care, and High-dose chemotherapy and stem cell rescue First, stem cells are removed (harvested) from the patient’s blood or bone marrow. The harvested stem cells are concentrated and frozen for preservation. Next, the patient receives high-dose chemotherapy to destroy any cancer cells in your body. This also kills all the stem cells in the bone marrow. Lastly, the harvested stem cells are returned (transfused) to the patient, where they’ll grow new, healthy blood-forming stem cells in the bone marrow. additional factors—including your goals and preferences. Because the procedure can be risky and the side effects harsh, it may not be a useful option for people who are older or frail. Ask your team about the benefits and risks of having a stem cell rescue. Side effects of stem cell rescue Most side effects of stem cell rescue come from the chemotherapy. High-dose chemotherapy can result in nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hair loss, mouth sores, and other side effects. Medicines are available during chemotherapy to help reduce most of these side effects. You’ll also likely feel tired and weak after the procedure and while waiting for the new blood stem cells to grow in the bone marrow. This should get better over time as you recover. Supportive care Supportive care (also called palliative care) is for relieving the symptoms of cancer and the side effects of cancer therapies, and other health issues related to the cancer. Supportive care is given at any stage of disease, not just at the end of life. It isn’t meant to treat the cancer, but rather to relieve symptoms and make you more comfortable. While one goal of treatment is to control cancer, that should be balanced with the other goal of treatment: maintaining quality of life. For older patients who have other diseases or conditions and aren’t able to fully perform ordinary daily activities, supportive care by itself may be a reasonable option. What’s next? Now that you’ve been introduced to the various treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma, the first step toward treatment is to come up with the best possible treatment plan. This plan involves a number of different health care providers. Multidisciplinary care During the course of your diagnosis and treatment, you’ll be cared for by numerous doctors, specialists, and allied health providers. These may include a neuro-oncologist, neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, pathologist, ophthalmologist, nurses, primary care doctor, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, palliative care specialist, pain specialist, psychologist, social workers, nutritionist, and rehabilitation specialists like physical, occupational, and speech therapists. When all these providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know who to contact with questions or concerns. Ask who will coordinate your care and what efforts can be made to schedule appointments together. Your multidisciplinary care team should clearly discuss your care goals with you. Removing or reducing the size of your lymphoma is one goal of your team. But you and your team’s other goals may include improving your overall well-being, maintaining your ability to do dayto-day activities, reducing pain, getting good nutrition, and lowering stress and anxiety. Your multidisciplinary team will meet to discuss your treatment and which options are best for you. The next chapter explains the phases of treatment and what your individual treatment plan may be. Quality of life Quality of life refers to a person’s overall enjoyment of life, including their sense of well-being and ability to participate in their usual activities. Your quality of life should be the main priority that guides your treatment and care. Successful treatment isn’t just about reducing the cancer. Other goals include minimizing cognitive problems, reducing pain, lowering anxiety and stress, carrying out regular activities, being with friends and family, and enjoying life as best as you can. Your multidisciplinary team When all of your doctors, specialists, and allied health providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. Be clear about your treatment goals when you talk with your multidisciplinary team. Key points h A recommended treatment option for primary CNS lymphoma is participating in a clinical trial. Other treatment options include corticosteroids, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, and stem cell rescue. Often, some of these therapies are combined to treat primary CNS lymphoma. Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that damages and destroys rapidly dividing cells throughout the body. The main chemotherapy drug used to treat primary CNS lymphoma is methotrexate. Whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) is the most commonly used radiation technique for primary CNS lymphoma. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to slow their growth and spread. Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system to fight cancer. The main immunotherapy drug for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab. High-dose chemotherapy and stem cell rescue uses your own blood-forming stem cells to jumpstart the bone marrow to make more healthy blood cells. Supportive care is for relieving the symptoms of cancer and the side effects of cancer treatment. Supportive care is given at any stage of cancer, not just at the end of life. 66 Ask about clinical trials available to you and the services your hospital and other facilities provide to cancer patients, such as counseling, nutritional advice, meditation, physical therapy, palliative care, and integrative medicine. Don’t be shy. Be your own advocate—or ask someone close to be one for you.” Multidisciplinary care means that a number of doctors, specialists, and allied health providers are working and communicating as a team to help you. Quality of life refers to a person’s overall enjoyment of life, including their sense of well-being and ability to participate in their usual activities. 4 Phases of treatment Induction Consolidation Treatment for the spine Treatment for the eyes What’s next? Key points Treatment should start soon after being diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma. This chapter describes what to expect from the treatment process and explains the options for each phase of treatment. Although there are different treatment options for primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma, the treatment approach is often a two-step process. The first step is the induction phase, which aims to wipe out all lymphoma cells or as many as possible. The goal of the second step, the consolidation phase, is to destroy any cancer cells that may remain in the body after the first phase. Consolidation is also for preventing the lymphoma from returning. Induction The first (induction) phase of treatment can last several months. Treatment typically requires multiple courses of chemotherapy, which are given while in the hospital. The options for induction treatment are listed in Guide 1 and discussed here: Clinical trial Clinical trials allow you to receive treatment while also helping researchers learn more about this uncommon cancer. Everyone with primary CNS lymphoma is encouraged to consider enrolling in a clinical trial. The treatment you receive in the trial may or may not work better than the standard treatments for primary CNS lymphoma. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial you may be eligible for. If you don’t want to join a clinical trial or none are available for you, the recommended induction treatment is high-dose methotrexate chemotherapy, often given with other chemotherapies. High-dose chemotherapy The most effective chemotherapy drug for primary CNS lymphoma is methotrexate. Methotrexate has been used for many years to treat a variety of cancers. It works by blocking the body’s use of folate, a form of vitamin B. Lymphoma cells can’t multiply and spread as quickly without folate. High doses of methotrexate are needed to overcome the blood-brain barrier and still have enough strength to kill lymphoma cells. The blood-brain barrier is a protective layer around the brain that prevents germs, infections, and other toxins from getting in. But it also blocks some chemotherapy drugs like methotrexate from reaching the brain. For induction therapy, high-dose methotrexate is given together with the immunotherapy drug rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab can be given on its own but it usually works better when given with chemotherapy. In addition to methotrexate and rituximab, one or more other chemotherapy medicines such as temozolomide, vincristine, and procarbazine may also be included. Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone. Your treatment team may recommend a different induction therapy if: Your kidneys aren’t working well High-dose chemotherapy is too intense or risky for you Cancer was found in your spine or spinal fluid If you can’t have high-dose methotrexate, other options for induction therapy include: Ibrutinib (Imbruvica) or similar medication Temozolomide (Temodar) Rituximab with or without temozolomide Lenalidomide with or without rituximab High-dose cytarabine h Pemetrexed h Pomalidomide
