Bladder cancer basics About bladder cancer Bladder cancer treatment Key points Having cancer can be worrisome and stressful. This book will help you understand your diagnosis of bladder cancer. It will also explain your options for treatment. Taken together, you’ll have the confidence to make well-informed decisions about what’s best for you. This may reduce some of the fear and worry. About bladder cancer What is bladder cancer? Bladder cancer is a disease that occurs when cells in the inner lining of the bladder grow out of control. The bladder is a hollow, balloonlike organ that stores urine. It’s located in your pelvis—the area between your hip bones in your lower abdomen. The bladder’s inner lining, called the urothelium, prevents urine from leaking back into the body. What does the bladder do? • The bladder is a hollow organ in the lower pelvis. Its main job is to store urine (pee). In adults, the bladder can hold up to 2 cups of urine. • Urine is made by the kidneys and flows down to the bladder through two tubes called ureters. • The bladder gets bigger as it fills with urine and gets smaller when you pee. It’s about the size of an orange when empty and the size of a grapefruit when full. When you urinate, the muscles in the walls of the bladder contract. This forces the urine out of the bladder and through a tube called the urethra, which streams it out of the body. • Together, these organs are called the urinary tract. Bladder cancer happens when abnormal (cancer) cells develop genetic errors (mutations) that cause them to make many more cancer cells. Cancer cells also avoid normal cell death. As cancer cells increase, they crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Over time, the cancer cells may form a tumor in the bladder. Sometimes the cells grow deeper and invade the bladder’s muscle layer. The cancer may even break through the bladder and spread to other parts of the body. Is bladder cancer common? Bladder cancer is one of the most common cancers in adults. Most people who have bladder cancer are aged 55 years and over. Bladder cancer is often found at an early stage when the cancer is highly treatable. However, bladder cancer commonly comes back again even after treatment. In many cases, bladder cancer comes back in a different place and sometimes more advanced than before. That’s why follow-up testing is so important. People with bladder cancer need regular follow-up tests for many years to check if the cancer has returned. The most common kind of bladder cancer starts in the urothelial cells, which are stretchy cells that line the inside of the bladder. Urothelial cells also form the inner layer in the rest of the urinary tract, which includes the kidneys, the ureters, and the urethra. Cancer of the urothelium can start in these areas instead of the bladder, although it’s less common. Other (non-urothelial) types of bladder cancer are much less common. These include squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and small cell carcinoma. How is bladder cancer found? Bladder cancer is usually found when a person has symptoms. A symptom is a problem or feeling that may signal a disease or condition. The most common symptom of bladder cancer, and the one that usually appears first, is having blood in your urine (hematuria). How does blood get into urine? Bladder tumors are likely to release a little blood, which mixes with the urine in your bladder. The blood may turn your urine pink or bright red. Or, if there isn’t enough blood to be visible, your urine may look normal. But your clinical team can still detect blood by looking at a sample of the urine under a microscope. Blood in the urine can be caused by many other things besides bladder cancer. The most common cause is an infection in the urinary tract. So anyone with blood in their urine should see a health care provider to get their urine tested. Other symptoms of bladder cancer include: Frequent urination Urgency to urinate Painful urination Back pain Not every person with bladder cancer will have all these symptoms. Some people will have no symptoms. A person with one or more of these symptoms should visit a doctor or other health care provider who can recommend different tests. These tests are used to make a diagnosis. (A diagnosis means identifying an illness by using tests.) What does aggressive mean? Bladder cancer When health care professionals describe cancer as aggressive, they mean the cancer is likely to grow or spread more quickly than average. Bladder cancer is often described by how far it has spread into the muscle layer of the bladder. Here, the cancer tumor has grown through the inner lining (urothelial layer) and invaded the muscle layer in the bladder wall. This type of cancer is known as muscleinvasive bladder cancer. Aggressive can also be used to describe a treatment that’s stronger or more intense than other treatment options. Some people reading this book may have already been tested and given a diagnosis of bladder cancer. For those who haven’t been diagnosed yet, the only way to make sure you have bladder cancer is to have tests that: h Look inside your bladder (cystoscopy and imaging) Study your urine (urinalysis and cytology) Analyze a sample of surgically removed bladder tissue (resection and biopsy) We’ll talk about these and other tests in Chapter What causes bladder cancer? Many people wonder why they got cancer. Cancer experts don’t know exactly what causes bladder cells to grow out of control. What they do know is that bladder cancer and other cancers start with abnormal changes (mutations) in the genes of cells. Genes are tiny parts of a cell that carry the instructions for how cells behave. These instructions also control how new cells are made. Sometimes, mutations can mix up these instructions. This can turn normal cells into cancer cells. In most people with bladder cancer, these mutations aren’t passed down in families (hereditary mutation). They happen on their own and only in cancer cells. Still, you may have a higher risk for bladder cancer if another family member also had bladder cancer. In rare cases, mutations in these genes can be passed down in families. This results in an increased risk of getting bladder cancer. However, only some individuals with these genetic mutations go on to develop bladder cancer. What are the risk factors for bladder cancer? A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause bladder cancer. But people with bladder cancer often have one or more of these risk factors: Smoking – Smoking is the greatest risk factor for bladder cancer. It accounts for about half of all cases. Secondhand smoke increases bladder cancer risk, too. Quitting smoking, even after diagnosis, can still be helpful. Age – The risk of bladder cancer increases as you age. Family history – Your risk increases if you or anyone in your family has had bladder cancer. Also, people with an inherited condition called Lynch syndrome have a greater risk of cancer in the urinary tract, including bladder cancer. Chemical exposure – Some chemicals used in dyes, rubber, leather, printing materials, textiles, and paint products have been linked to an increased risk for bladder cancer. How advanced is my bladder cancer? Once bladder cancer is found, it’s important to know how far it has grown or spread. Bladder cancer advances in 3 phases: Non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer has grown on or in the bladder’s inner layer of urothelial cells, but not into the bladder’s muscle layer. Muscle-invasive bladder cancer has grown through the bladder’s inner urothelial layer and into its muscle layer. But it hasn’t grown anywhere else. Metastatic bladder cancer has spread outside the bladder to other areas of the body. Common areas of metastatic bladder cancer include the lymph nodes, bones, lungs, liver, and the inner wall of the abdomen. (Lymph nodes are small, bean-shaped glands that transport a fluid called lymph and help fight infection. Lymph nodes are found around the urinary tract and all over the body.) Treatment is different for each of these three phases of bladder cancer. These phases are further divided into stages, which are explained in Chapter Bladder cancer treatment What’s the best treatment for bladder cancer? There’s no single treatment that’s best for everyone. The best treatment for bladder cancer is the treatment that’s best for you. You’ll work with your treatment team to choose which option makes the most sense for you. This choice is based on your cancer stage as well as your overall health and personal preferences. Very often, the best option includes more than one type of therapy. Common treatments for bladder cancer include: Surgery Chemotherapy Immunotherapy Radiation therapy Targeted therapy Surgery, by itself or with other treatments, can be used in many stages of bladder cancer. For less advanced cancer, a minor surgical procedure can be used to remove just the tumor. For more advanced cancer, the entire bladder can be surgically removed. In addition, you may receive chemotherapy or immunotherapy directly into the bladder. For people with metastatic bladder cancer, chemotherapy or immunotherapy is used to treat cancer anywhere in the body. Another treatment option is to join a clinical trial. You’ll also receive treatment for any side effects caused by cancer therapy. Can bladder cancer be cured? Bladder cancer in an early (non-invasive) stage can usually be cured. Treatment for more advanced stage (muscle-invasive) bladder cancer can be complicated but it may still get rid of the cancer. Metastatic bladder cancer is not typically curable, but it is still treatable. And treatments are improving all the time. For most people with bladder cancer, treatment provides a longer and more comfortable life with fewer symptoms. It’s important to know that bladder cancer commonly comes back even after treatment. In fact, bladder cancer is more likely to come back than almost any other kind of cancer. From now on, you and your health care providers will have to keep watching for any sign that the cancer returns. Even so, there’s hope. If the cancer does come back, it can be treated. Many people live with bladder cancer and still have a good quality of life. Plus, new and improved ways to detect and treat bladder cancer are helping people live longer and with fewer side effects than ever before. Experts predict that treatment will improve rapidly over the next few years, with better results for all stages of bladder cancer. As a result of clinical trials, many new treatments for bladder cancer have been approved or are on the horizon. As always, you can try to join a clinical trial at almost any point during cancer care. Key points Bladder cancer happens when abnormal cells in the inner layer of the bladder grow out of control. The most common symptom of bladder cancer is blood in the urine. Bladder cancer comes from abnormal changes (mutations) in the genes of cells. Smoking is the greatest risk factor for bladder cancer. Many bladder cancers can be cured. All bladder cancers can be treated. For most people with bladder cancer, treatment requires more than one type of therapy. Bladder cancer very often comes back even after treatment. You and your care team will need to watch for its return for potentially the rest of your life. 66 Don’t Google your diagnosis and assume that statistics define your life! Every person’s cancer story and situation is different.” 2 Tests for bladder cancer General health tests Blood and urine tests Cystoscopy and biopsy Imaging Inherited cancer risk Quitting smoking Key points Several tests are needed to diagnose and treat bladder cancer. This chapter explains these tests and what to expect when being tested. Before you can be treated, you’ll need several tests to confirm your diagnosis. These tests measure how much the cancer has grown and how quickly it’s growing. Tests are also used to plan treatment, to find out how well treatment is working, and to check if the cancer comes back after treatment. This chapter describes what tests you may have and what to expect during testing. Bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Tests and procedures that you may receive are described next. Not everyone will need all of these tests. General health tests Medical and family histories A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you’ve had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Also, put together a list of your prescription medications and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Some cancers and other diseases run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask your family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancers, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. Physical exam A physical exam is a check of your body for any signs of disease. Your health care provider may feel for abnormalities or tenderness in your abdomen and pelvis. Blood and urine tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. A blood test requires a sample of your blood, which is removed through a needle placed into your vein. One sample may be used for several different blood tests: Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in your blood. Your doctor will want to know if you have enough red blood cells to carry oxygen throughout your body, white blood cells to fight infection, and platelets to control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures important chemicals, proteins, and other substances in your blood. Levels that are too high or low could be a sign of a health problem in areas like the kidneys or liver. Who’s on your multidisciplinary care team? Treating bladder cancer takes a team approach. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your cancer treatment, while others will be there for parts of it. Your team should communicate and work together to bring the best knowledge from each specialty. This is called multidisciplinary care. Depending on your diagnosis, your multidisciplinary team may include a dozen or more specialists and care providers: Your primary care doctor handles medical care not related to your cancer. Your primary doctor can help you express your thoughts about treatments to your cancer care team. A urologist is an expert in the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. A urologic oncologist is a surgeon who diagnoses cancers of the urinary tract and the male reproductive organs, and treats the cancer using surgery and intravesical therapy. A medical oncologist treats cancer using systemic therapies such as chemotherapy and immunotherapy. A medical oncologist will often coordinate your care with other team members. If not, ask who will coordinate your care. A radiation oncologist prescribes and plans radiation therapy to treat cancer. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. A pharmacist prepares chemotherapy and other medicines, and can offer treatment advice. A diagnostic radiologist reads the results of x-rays and other imaging tests. An anesthesiologist gives anesthesia, a medicine so you don’t feel pain during surgery or procedures. Advanced practice providers are an important part of any team. These are registered nurse practitioners and physician assistants who monitor your health and provide care. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nutritionists offer guidance on what foods or diet are most suitable for your particular condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that affect how you feel. Genetic counselors are experts who interpret how your family history may impact your treatment. Some important tests in a CMP are: Liver function test looks at enzymes made by the liver, like alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. Kidney function test measures waste products like creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to check if your kidneys are working normally. This test can be very helpful for deciding your treatment. to identify some of these specific tumor cells. Scientists call these biomarkers. At this time, biomarker tests may provide some helpful clues about bladder cancer, but aren’t quite reliable enough to diagnose it. Biomarker tests are also sometimes used for surveillance in people who’ve been treated for non–muscleinvasive bladder cancer. Surveillance means watching to see if the cancer comes back after it has been treated or removed. Urine cytology Urine cytology is a lab test that analyzes your urine for any cancer or precancerous cells. You may receive a urine cytology test if you have blood in your urine. A urine cytology is done like other urine tests— you pee into a small plastic container. Or, your urologist may collect a sample of your urine during cystoscopy. Either way, the urine sample is sent to a lab for testing. At the lab, a pathologist (a doctor who examines cells and tissue to find disease) uses a microscope to look for any abnormal cells in your urine sample. If abnormal cells are found, it means that cancer may be located anywhere in the urinary tract. You’ll need a cystoscopy procedure to find out if it’s in the urethra or the bladder. If cancer isn’t found in the urethra or bladder, you’ll need imaging tests to investigate the ureters, kidneys, or other areas. Urine tests for tumor markers Tumors shed cancer cells somewhat like a dog sheds hair. These cancer cells can end up in your urine. Urine tests are now available Cystoscopy and biopsy Cystoscopy is a procedure to look inside your urethra and bladder for any sign of cancer. This procedure uses a cystoscope, a tube with a camera and a light at the end, which is inserted into the urethra and through to the bladder. Cystoscopy may be done at your urologist’s office, a hospital, or a clinic. The procedure takes only a few minutes, doesn’t require general anesthesia, and you can go home afterward. During a cystoscopy You’ll lie on your back on an exam table. You may be positioned with your feet up and your knees apart. After lubricating your urethra (and possibly numbing it with an anesthetic gel), your urologist will slowly insert the cystoscope into the opening of the urethra. This opening is at the tip of the penis or just in front of the vagina. This may be uncomfortable at first but it shouldn’t be painful. The cystoscope will move through the urethra and into the bladder. The urologist will view a monitor that shows real-time images of the inside of the bladder. If any areas appear suspicious, the urologist may use a small tool on the cystoscope to remove tiny tissue samples for testing (biopsy). If a biopsy can’t be done during this visit, you might be scheduled for a separate procedure on another day. In addition to biopsy samples, the urologist can completely remove very small cancer growths during the cystoscopy. However, if a tumor is found, you’ll need to have it removed in an operating room at a clinic or hospital. This procedure is further explained in Chapter Cystoscopy A cystoscopy is an exam to look inside the urethra and bladder for any signs of cancer. If anything looks suspicious, the urologist can use a small tool on the cystoscope to remove tiny tissue samples for testing (biopsy). A flexible cystoscope (upper left) is used for viewing and biopsy. A rigid cystoscope (bottom right) is more invasive, but it can also remove small tumors. In a very similar exam, called a ureteroscopy, the cystoscope goes a little farther to examine the upper parts of the urinary tract—the ureters and inner kidneys. A ureteroscopy is done only if something seems abnormal with the ureters or kidneys. After a cystoscopy After the procedure, you may have one or more of these side effects: Bleeding from your urethra, which can appear bright pink in your urine or on toilet paper A burning sensation during urination Urinating more often for the next day or two If a tissue sample was taken for a biopsy, it will be sent to a lab and tested for cancer. Imaging Imaging means taking detailed pictures (images) of the insides of the body. The images can show the size, location, and other features of cancer. Imaging can reveal where the cancer started and whether the cancer has spread (metastasized). After your scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist. A radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in interpreting imaging tests. The radiologist will send the results to your doctor or care team. This information helps to plan the next steps of your care. Your doctor or other health care provider will discuss the results with you. Be sure to ask any questions you have. Is blue light cystoscopy better? Cystoscopy commonly uses a white light to see inside the bladder. Some newer cystoscopes now use a blue light. When combined with a special dye injected into the bladder, blue light cystoscopy can identify tumors a little more distinctly than white light. Another technology called narrow-band imaging also helps detect tumors more clearly during cystoscopy but doesn’t require a dye. While both blue light cystoscopy and narrow-band imaging may potentially detect tumors better than standard white light, they’re relatively new and still in the “testing phase.” More research will show whether they can replace or be used with white light as the standard detection method. Types of imaging include x-rays, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasound. CT scan A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a series of cross-sectional images. To look for cancer that has spread beyond the bladder, you may have a CT scan of your abdomen and pelvis. The pelvis is the area of the lower abdomen located between the hip bones; it contains reproductive organs as well as the bladder and rectum. A CT scanner is a large machine that has a tunnel in the middle. During the test, you’ll lie on a table that moves slowly through the tunnel. Pillows or straps may be used to help keep you still during the test. PET/CT scan A PET scan uses a radioactive drug injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it’s called a PET/CT scan. PET/CT creates detailed images that are useful in certain clinical situations for finding cancer that has spread outside the bladder. A PET/CT scan can be done with one or two machines, depending on the cancer center. MRI MRI uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. An MRI is used to get a more detailed view of cancer within the bladder or urinary tract. It’s also used to see if cancer has spread to the liver, nearby lymph nodes, or the bones in your pelvis. Like a CT scanner, an MRI is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. Unlike CT, MRI doesn’t use radiation (x-rays). An MRI also makes much more noise and takes longer than a CT scan. Tell your team if you get nervous in small spaces. You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still. Imaging To look for cancer that has spread beyond the bladder, you may have an imaging scan of your abdomen and pelvis. Because an MRI uses magnets, you can’t bring any metal objects (such as a cell phone, wristwatch, belt with a metal buckle, or jewelry) into the imaging room. Other types of imaging CT and MRI are commonly used to see how far bladder cancer has spread. Other types of imaging are sometimes used to look for cancer in other parts of the urinary tract or other parts of the body: Urogram uses a contrast solution and either CT or MRI to see how well your entire urinary tract is working. The contrast makes the lining of your kidneys, ureters, and bladder easier to see. You may have a urogram if you’re feeling symptoms such as pain in your side or back, or if you have blood in your urine. Renal ultrasound shows your kidneys, ureters, and bladder in real time. It’s the same technology used to look at a baby in the womb. A renal ultrasound is a painless, non-surgical test that produces black and white images of your kidneys and other organs. Pyelogram uses x-rays and contrast solution to look for a blockage—such as a tumor, kidney stone, or blood clot—in your ureters or kidneys. This test may also be used to find causes for blood in urine. A pyelogram is usually done in the operating room during a cystoscopy. You’ll be given anesthesia for this procedure. During the cystoscopy, the contrast is given intravenously (into a vein) or injected directly into the ureters. Tips for testing Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsies will be used to determine your treatment plan. It’s important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a handy way to access your test results. Follow these tips for testing: Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get copies of your blood tests, imaging results, and pathology reports. Other providers or specialists may ask you for them. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your cellphone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician informed of any changes to your list. Chest imaging uses CT or x-ray to see if the cancer has reached the lungs. Bone scan is done when symptoms suggest that the cancer may have spread to any bones. Inherited cancer risk Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk for different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer or other features, your doctor might suggest genetic testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Germline testing may be more appropriate for people who have: Already had cancer A close relative with bladder cancer Age below 50 Cancer of the upper urinary tract High grade (fast growing) cancer Lynch syndrome or a family member with Lynch syndrome If you have one or more of these factors, you should ask about genetic counseling. A genetic counselor is an expert who has special training in genetic diseases and can help you decide whether to have germline testing. The test is done using a sample of your blood, saliva, urine, or tumor tissue. A genetic counselor Quitting smoking is hard. Getting help can improve your chances of quitting for good. will also help you interpret the results of these tests. (Ask your care team or go to findageneticcounselor.com) For bladder cancer, the most common germline mutations are found in these genes: CDKN2A, FGFR3, PIK3CA, ERBBIf you have an inherited risk, your cancer might require additional testing or specialized treatment. Quitting smoking Smoking increases the risk for bladder cancer. People who smoke are 3 times more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Your family and friends could also have a greater risk because your secondhand smoke may increase their risk for bladder cancer, too. Quitting smoking may reduce your risk of getting cancer and other serious diseases. It can also help treatments for bladder cancer work better. Key points Tests of your blood and urine can show if something in your body isn’t working right. This may be a clue that you have a serious illness, such as cancer. Cystoscopy uses a viewing device inserted through the urethra to look for cancer inside the bladder. Imaging tests can show whether cancer has spread to tissues, organs, and lymph nodes near the bladder, or to distant parts of the body. A urogram uses contrast and CT or MRI to see the lining of your urinary tract and to find out the extent of your bladder cancer. A urogram uses contrast and CT or MRI to see how well your urinary tract is working and to find out the extent of bladder cancer. People who smoke are much more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it’s very important to quit. Smoking or vaping can limit how well cancer treatment works. Smoking greatly increases your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. It also increases your chances of developing other cancers. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke or vape, ask your care team about counseling and medicines to help you quit. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco 3 Staging and grading 23 24 26 26 27 How far and how fast? Stage Grade Subtypes Key points The stage and grade of your cancer represent how far and how fast your cancer has grown. Your care team needs to know the stage and the grade of your cancer to predict the course of your disease and to make a treatment plan. Stage measures the physical extent of the cancer. It’s a number rating of how far the cancer has grown into the bladder wall. Numbers range from 0 to 4, where 0 means no growth into the bladder and 4 means it has grown through the bladder wall and out to other parts of the body. Grade measures the overall aggressiveness of the cancer. It’s an estimate of the rate that the cancer is growing. Cancer grade is either low grade (slow) or high grade (fast). How far and how fast? You’ve had many tests to learn about your cancer. But before you receive treatment, your care team needs to figure out how far your cancer has grown and how fast it’s growing. This is done with staging and grading. It’s important for your care team to know the stage and the grade of your cancer to predict the course of your disease and to make a treatment plan. The next chapters explain how these ratings are used to choose treatments. But first, let’s get to know more about staging and grading. Layers of the bladder The wall of the bladder has four main layers. From the inside to the outside, they are: Inner lining (urothelial layer) Connective tissue layer Muscle layer Outer fatty layer Stage Staging is a way to describe how much cancer is in your body, how much it has grown, and how far it has spread. If the cancer has spread outside the bladder (metastasized), staging describes where it has spread to and whether it’s affecting other parts of the body. Staging uses your test results to identify and locate your cancer. Staging helps you and your care team select the best therapy. There are five stages of bladder cancer: 0, 1, 2, 3, and Some stages are also divided into subgroups. You may see the cancer stage written with a T, where the T stands for tumor: T0, T1, T2, T3, and T An important thing about bladder cancer is whether the tumor has or hasn’t grown into the bladder muscle. Cancer in stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t grown into the muscle layer (non– muscle-invasive). Cancer in stages 2, 3, and 4 have grown into the muscle layer (muscleinvasive). Cancer that has invaded the muscle layer needs more intense treatment. Stage 0 Stage 0 is the earliest stage of bladder cancer. This stage of cancer affects only the inner lining of the bladder (urothelial layer). Stage 0 has two subgroups: Stage 0a describes cancer cells that grow from the inner lining toward the hollow center of the bladder, rather than into the bladder wall. Stage 0is stands for carcinoma in situ (CIS). This is a flat patch of cancer cells that hasn’t grown any farther than where it started. It’s still on the surface of the bladder lining and has yet to invade deeper layers. However, carcinoma in situ is fast-growing, aggressive, and can be very serious. Stage 1 Stage 1 has grown through the inner lining of the bladder wall and into the layer of connective tissue. But stage 1 hasn’t invaded the muscle layer of the bladder wall (non– muscle-invasive). Stage 2 Stage 2 bladder cancer has grown into the muscle layer (muscle-invasive), but it hasn’t reached the fatty layer covering the outside of the bladder nor has it spread anywhere else. Stage 3 Stage 3 has grown through the bladder wall and into the fatty layer surrounding the bladder. It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade. The grade measures how aggressive the cancer is. It’s a rating of how fast the cancer will likely grow and spread. To figure out the grade, a sample of your tumor will be studied in a laboratory by a pathologist. The pathologist will compare the cancer cells to normal cells. The more different they look, the higher the grade. And the higher the grade, the faster the cancer is expected to spread. LG means that the cancer cells are low grade (slow growing). HG means that the cancer cells are high grade (fast growing). The inner lining of the bladder is made of urothelial cells. Most cases of bladder cancer start in the urothelial cells. So this type of cancer is called urothelial cancer. But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder. Stage 1 means that a tumor has formed and has invaded the layer of connective tissue in the bladder wall. Stages 2, 3, and 4 bladder cancers are muscle-invasive. The tumor has invaded the muscle layer of the bladder wall. In stage 3 bladder cancer, the tumor has grown into the fat layer around the bladder. There may also be cancer in nearby lymph nodes. Stage 4 is metastatic bladder cancer. This is cancer that has spread outside the bladder and to distant sites in the body. Cancer grade is an estimate of how fast the cancer is expected to grow. Low grade bladder cancer is slow growing. High grade cancer grows more quickly. We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer. Take our survey to let us know what we got right and what we could do better. NCCN.org/patients/feedback Treatment options for bladder cancer Surgery Intravesical therapy Systemic therapy Radiation therapy Clinical trials Supportive care Side effects of treatment Key points What’s your stage? This chapter explains the different treatment options for bladder cancer. Many people with bladder cancer receive more than one type of treatment. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that’s right for you. Treatment for bladder cancer is based on many things. This includes the extent, severity, and type of cancer. It also includes your age, your ability to perform daily tasks, your other health issues, and the availability and affordability of drugs. Importantly, treatment is also based on your wishes and preferences. There are several ways to treat bladder cancer. It’s likely that you’ll need a few different types of treatment over months or years. Treatments include: Surgery – The goal of surgery is to take out the tumor and sometimes the surrounding tissue. Surgery procedures range from snipping a single tumor from the bladder lining to removing the entire bladder and other organs. Intravesical therapy – Intravesical therapy involves filling the bladder with a liquid medication that helps destroy cancer cells. Systemic therapy – Systemic therapy is typically an intravenous (IV) treatment that treats cancer anywhere in the whole body. Types of systemic therapy include chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and targeted therapy. Radiation therapy – Radiation therapy is a local therapy, which means it affects a specific area of the body. Sometimes chemotherapy or another therapy is added to radiation therapy to enhance treatment. Clinical trial – Clinical trials are done to test experimental treatments. You may be able to join a clinical trial at any time. Surgery Types of surgery for bladder cancer include tumor removal and bladder removal. Tumor removal For bladder cancer, a surgical procedure called a resection removes the tumor but leaves the rest of the bladder in place. The full name of the procedure is called a transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT, sometimes pronounced tur-bit). Even though it has a complicated name, the concept of TURBT is simple. It’s a procedure that removes tumors through the urethra without having to cut into the abdomen. The tumor can then be tested to provide a more detailed diagnosis. TURBT is done in an operating room in a clinic or hospital. You’ll be given anesthesia to put you to sleep. The urologist then guides an instrument with a small cutting device through the urethra and into the bladder. The instrument is used to examine and remove the tumor from the bladder lining. The goals of TURBT are to: Confirm the initial bladder cancer diagnosis. Take a sample of the bladder wall to see if the tumor has invaded the muscle layer. Remove all the visible tumor. After the procedure, most people can go home the same day. But you’ll need a few days to rest and recover. You may feel pain or burning when you urinate and have blood in your urine for the following 2 weeks or so. Another TURBT procedure may be needed about 2 to 6 weeks after the first one. The second TURBT is done to make sure all the tumor is removed. Or it may be done to get a deeper biopsy sample for the pathologist to examine. A treatment called intravesical therapy is often done in combination with TURBT. (More about intravesical therapy to follow.) Bladder removal A procedure called a cystectomy treats bladder cancer by removing the entire bladder. When the word radical is used, it means taking out the bladder as well as nearby lymph nodes. If the disease has spread farther, sometimes other nearby organs also need to be removed, including: Urethra Prostate Seminal vesicles (glands that help make semen) TURBT A transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) is a procedure that examines and removes tumors on the bladder wall. Part of the vas deferens (a tube that carries sperm away from the testicles) Proximal urethra (part of the urethra that goes through the prostate) Uterus Ovaries Fallopian tubes Part of the vagina Radical cystectomy is the most widely used surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. It’s a major operation that involves cutting into your abdomen. You’ll need to stay in the hospital for at least several days. It may take 2 to 3 months or longer for you to recover. Common side effects and complications of a radical cystectomy include constipation, diarrhea, bleeding, bowel problems, infections, and changes in sexual function. Talk to your Cystectomy Cystectomy is surgery to remove the bladder. A radical cystectomy removes the entire bladder, nearby lymph nodes, and other organs. It’s the most common surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. A partial cystectomy removes part of the bladder. It’s rarely used for bladder cancer. urologist and treatment team about the risks, benefits, and side effects of a radical cystectomy. Because a radical cystectomy removes your entire bladder, you’ll need a new way for urine to exit your body. So another procedure, called a urinary diversion, is also done at the same time. To find out about the 3 types of urinary diversion, see the next page. Partial cystectomy A partial cystectomy is a surgical procedure to remove part of the bladder. It’s not widely used for the treatment of bladder cancer. Fewer than 1 out of 20 people with bladder cancer are eligible for a partial cystectomy. It can only be done if the cancer is in a spot that can be neatly removed without taking out the whole bladder. Types of urinary diversion If your bladder is removed, urine needs another way to leave your body. This requires an additional surgical procedure called a urinary diversion. There are 3 types of urinary diversions: Ileal conduit In this urinary diversion, the surgeon removes a section of the small intestine (ileum) to use as a tube (or conduit). The surgeon also creates a small hole, called a stoma, in the abdominal wall. One end of the tube is connected to the ureters, much like the bladder was. The other end of the tube is attached to the stoma. Urine drains from the kidneys and ureters, passes through the tube, and exits the body through the stoma. Urine can trickle out of the stoma at any time. A small disposable bag is attached to the outside of your abdomen to collect the urine when it comes out of the stoma. This is called an ostomy bag (or ostomy pouch). The bag is attached to your body with the help of an adhesive ring. The ring sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Most people find that they need to empty the bag every 2 to 4 hours, depending on how much liquid they drink. A closable spout at the bottom of the bag allows the urine to be emptied into a toilet without taking off the bag. Neobladder For this procedure, the bladder is replaced with a segment of small intestine that acts like a new bladder (neobladder). Like the original bladder, this substitute bladder is attached to the ureters at one end and to the urethra at the other end. This means that urine follows the same path out of the body it normally would if you still had your bladder. Because urine leaves the body in the usual way, a stoma and an ostomy bag aren’t needed. A neobladder doesn’t work exactly the same way as a real bladder. You’ll probably need to empty it more often at first, maybe every 1 to 3 hours. Also, urine might come out when you don’t want or expect it to, like during sleep. This is called urinary incontinence. With time and training, you’ll be able to better control the flow of urine from your neobladder. Even so, a neobladder may be difficult to empty completely. Some people have a catheter inserted through their urethra to help empty the neobladder. Continent cutaneous pouch (Indiana pouch) This urinary diversion uses a portion of the large intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. (It’s also called an Indiana pouch because it was developed by surgeons at Indiana University.) A section of the small intestine is used to connect the pouch to a stoma in the wall of the abdomen. A one-way valve, made from part of the intestine, prevents the urine from flowing out of the stoma. The stoma can be covered by a small bandage. Sometimes the stoma can be made in the belly button, making it much less noticeable. A catheter must be inserted into the stoma, through the valve, and into the pouch several times a day to drain the urine. A benefit to this type of urinary diversion is that no ostomy bag is needed. This may appeal to people with concerns about body image or people who don’t want to worry about the bag coming loose or leaking. Intravesical therapy While surgery is done to remove visible cancer, intravesical therapy is used to destroy cancer cells that aren’t visible or are hard to reach. Intravesical therapy means putting medicine directly into the bladder. It’s done with a flexible tube, called a catheter, inserted into the urethra. The medicine flows through the catheter and into the bladder using a process called instillation. The two main intravesical therapies used to treat bladder cancer are bacillus CalmetteGuérin (BCG) and chemotherapy. Intravesical BCG Intravesical BCG therapy uses a fluid that contains a very weak bacterium (germ). The germ triggers the immune system, causing the immune system to attack cancer cells inside the bladder. Intravesical BCG can lower the chance of recurrence (cancer coming back) or getting worse (invading bladder muscle). Intravesical BCG is commonly used for highgrade bladder cancer that hasn’t invaded the muscle layer. It’s usually started about 3 to 6 weeks after TURBT, to allow the bladder time to heal. It’s given once a week for 6 weeks. You should have a full re-evaluation at 12 weeks after starting treatment. To prevent recurrence, you might be asked to continue having intravesical BCG therapy. This is called maintenance therapy. Maintenance therapy involves three intravesical BCG treatments (given in one week) at 3 months and again at 6 months after TURBT. You may continue to have maintenance therapy every 6 months for up to 3 years, depending on the risk of recurrence. Possible side effects of intravesical BCG therapy include fever, chills, the urge to Intravesical therapy Intravesical therapy is a treatment where a liquid medicine is placed directly into the bladder. The medicine aims to destroy any cancer cells that TURBT left behind and to prevent any new cancer cells from forming. urinate, pain or difficulty when urinating, and blood or particles (clots) in your urine. Talk to your treatment team about the side effects. There may be ways to help lessen these effects. If intravesical BCG doesn’t work on its own, a number of other treatment options are available in addition to treatment in clinical trials. Ask your provider or another member of your care team about these potential options. Intravesical chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug used to kill actively growing cancer cells. Intravesical chemotherapy is given to treat the cancer and to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. Intravesical chemotherapy can be given soon after a TURBT procedure. The treatment is a one-time dose instilled within 24 hours of TURBT surgery. It’s meant to “clean up” any cancer cells that surgery may have left behind and to prevent any new cancer from growing. Intravesical chemotherapy may also be an option if BCG is unavailable, or if you were given BCG therapy but it wasn’t effective. In these cases, it’s given on the same schedule as BCG therapy: once a week for 6 weeks, usually beginning 3 to 4 weeks after TURBT. Maintenance intravesical chemotherapy, if given, is usually on a monthly basis for 1 to 2 years. Because intravesical chemotherapy only goes into the bladder, not the entire body, it doesn’t usually cause the harsh side effects that chemotherapy is known for. However, it may cause the same type of side effects as intravesical BCG therapy. BCG shortage Even though BCG has been used for decades to treat bladder cancer, it’s been in short supply in the United States and worldwide for several years. As a result, many people with non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer haven’t been able to receive this treatment or have received a reduced dose. Patients with the highest risk are given the first opportunity to receive it. If a regular course of BCG treatment isn’t available to you, your treatment team may offer intravesical treatment with chemotherapy instead. Other options include: Reduced doses or a shorter course of BCG treatment Eliminating BCG maintenance therapy Bladder removal surgery (for those at high risk of the cancer returning after treatment) Joining a clinical trial Systemic therapy Systemic therapy means a treatment that affects the whole body. It’s generally given directly into a vein (intravenously, or IV). The most common types of systemic therapy for bladder cancer are chemotherapy and immunotherapy. To determine which type of systemic therapy is best for you, your treatment team will consider your overall health. This includes how your heart, liver, and kidneys are functioning, how far the cancer has progressed, and your ability to do day-to-day activities. Note that systemic chemotherapy is different than intravesical chemotherapy. Systemic chemotherapy is a whole-body therapy. Intravesical chemotherapy only affects the inside of the bladder. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is treatment with drugs to kill cancer cells. Most chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are slowly injected into a vein (infusion). The drugs travel in your bloodstream to treat cancer throughout your body. Chemotherapy may also harm some healthy cells, which is why it can cause harsh side effects. Talk to your care team about any potential side effects from your chemotherapy treatment. Chemotherapy may be given before surgery or sometimes after surgery depending on your type or stage of bladder cancer. Chemotherapy alone (without surgery) is sometimes the main treatment for people who have metastatic bladder cancer. What is dose-dense chemotherapy? The term dose-dense refers to a method of speeding up chemotherapy by shortening the amount of time in between treatments (doses). The most common systemic chemotherapy used to treat bladder cancer is a combination of medicines known as dose-dense methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (or ddMVAC). A commonly used chemotherapy for bladder cancer is cisplatin, which contains the metal platinum. Platinum-based chemotherapy medicines can be effective against bladder cancer but can also damage the kidneys. People with kidney conditions or other health issues may not be able to have chemotherapy or, if possible, may receive non-platinum chemotherapy medicine. Chemotherapy is given in a sequence of treatments called a cycle. A cycle includes a period of treatments (such as once-a-day for a few days) followed by a time of rest (several days or weeks). This treatment cycle is then repeated a few times. For example, you might have 3 to 6 cycles of chemotherapy over 2 to 3 months. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic therapy that uses your immune system (your body’s natural defense against infection and disease) to find and destroy cancer cells. Checkpoint inhibitors are one type of immunotherapy used to treat bladder cancer and other cancers. Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda). Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy waves— such as x-rays—to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. The type of radiation therapy usually used for bladder cancer is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). In EBRT, a large machine aims radiation at the tumor area. Radiation therapy can be given alone but is more often given with other bladder cancer treatments: Chemoradiation Chemotherapy and radiation therapy are often used together to treat bladder cancer. When given together, they work better than they do alone. This is called chemoradiation or chemoradiotherapy. Like many cancer treatments, chemoradiation works better for certain people than for others. Trimodal therapy Trimodal therapy refers to a combination of three treatments: TURBT to remove all visible cancer, followed by radiation and chemotherapy given together (chemoradiation). In certain people with bladder cancer, trimodal therapy can be used instead of bladder removal surgery (radical cystectomy). This is why trimodal therapy is referred to as a "bladder preserving" treatment. Clinical trials Therapy may also be given as part of a clinical trial. A clinical trial is a type of medical research study and a vital way to assess new treatment methods. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If a new drug, device, or treatment approach is found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, it may be approved by the FDA. Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of their treatment options, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk with your care team about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful. Phase 2 trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase 3 trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA. Phase 4 trials study the long-term safety and benefit of an FDA-approved treatment. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health. These requirements ensure that participants are alike in certain ways in order to compare how they respond to a specific treatment. Informed consent Clinical trials are managed by a group of experts called a research team. The research team will review the study with you in detail, including its purpose and the risks and benefits of joining. All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. This agreement confirms that you’ve been fully told about your part in the trial. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that clinical trials are voluntary and you can seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation You don’t need to wait for someone on your care team to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all your treatment options. Ask if a clinical trial is available for your situation. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It’s common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You’ll be informed if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There’s no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor usually pays for researchrelated costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or childcare due to extra appointments. Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov/ Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard treatment is billed to—and often covered by— insurance. You’re responsible for copays and any costs for this care that aren’t covered by your insurance. Supportive care Supportive care is health care that relieves symptoms caused by cancer or by its treatment. The aim of supportive care is to improve your quality of life. Supportive care may include relieving symptoms, emotional or spiritual support, financial aid, or family counseling. Supportive care is available at any cancer stage. Speak to your care team about how you’re feeling and if you’re having any side effects. You can read more about supportive care in Chapter Side effects of treatment A side effect is an unhealthy or unpleasant physical or emotional condition caused by treatment. All treatments for bladder cancer can cause side effects. Some people have many side effects while others have few. Some side effects can be very serious while others are simply unpleasant. Most side effects appear soon after treatment starts and go away after treatment ends. Other side effects are longterm or may appear years later. Side effects depend on many factors, especially the type of treatment (radiation versus chemotherapy, for example) and the length or the dose of treatment. Here are some common side effects of different treatments: Bladder removal surgery – bleeding, blood clots, kidney problems, infection, sexual dysfunction, incontinence, problems caused by the urinary diversion Intravesical therapy – swelling (inflammation) of the bladder lining, frequent urination, pain or burning feeling when urinating, blood in the urine, infection Chemotherapy – nausea, vomiting, extreme tiredness (fatigue), fever, infection, tingling or numbness, rash, diarrhea Immunotherapy – autoimmune reaction, fatigue, fever, nausea, loss of appetite, infection, diarrhea, constipation Not every patient develops nausea or vomiting from cancer therapy. But if you have these side effects, it’s important to reduce them as much as possible to prevent them from interfering with your treatment. Read more about these side effects in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Nausea and Vomiting, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Other notable side effects Some side effects happen more commonly in people with bladder cancer, particularly after bladder cancer surgery. While you may not get these side effects, you should be aware of them as you consider the benefits and risks of different treatments: h Sexual dysfunction – Treatment or cancer itself may interfere with your ability to have sex. Sexual dysfunction also includes a decreased desire to have sex. This may be due to a lack of energy, being self-conscious about your body after surgery, or feeling stressed out and depressed. Trouble controlling the flow of urine – Urine may come out when you’re not expecting it. This is referred to as urinary incontinence. But there are things you can do, like pelvic floor exercises, that can help you regain control of urine function. Many side effects can be managed. Some can even be prevented. Ask your treatment team for a complete list of short- and long-term side effects and information on how to manage them. Key points Treatment options for bladder cancer depend on the stage and grade of your cancer, your overall health, and your preferences. Transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) is a procedure that examines tumors on the bladder wall and removes them. Radical cystectomy is the most widely used surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. It involves removing the bladder, nearby lymph nodes, and other organs in the pelvis. A urinary diversion is a surgical procedure included with a radical cystectomy. Its purpose is to provide a new way for urine to leave the body. Intravesical therapy is the use of cancer medicine placed directly into the bladder through a catheter. The medicine is slowly put into the bladder using a process called instillation. Chemotherapy is treatment with drugs to kill cancer cells. Most chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are slowly injected into a vein (infusion). Chemotherapy affects cancer cells (and other cells) throughout the whole body. All treatments for bladder cancer can cause side effects. Ask your care team about ways to deal with the side effects of treatment. What’s your stage? If you’ve reached this page, then you’ve probably been told the stage of your bladder cancer. Turn to the correct chapter to find out about your treatment. If your urologist or another provider told you your cancer stage, but you don’t remember or you didn’t understand, call the office and ask for more information. Someone there should be willing to explain it to you. Turn to the chapter that matches your cancer stage to read about the types of treatment you may receive.
