Lung cancer basics What is lung cancer? What are the causes and risk factors? What are the symptoms of SCLC? What's the treatment for SCLC? Key points Small cell lung cancer forms from cells that line the inner airways of the lungs. It’s a cancer that can be aggressive and grows fast. This chapter gives you the basics of small cell lung cancer. What is lung cancer? The lungs are the main organs of the respiratory system. They deliver oxygen to the blood and remove carbon dioxide from the blood. The transfer of these gases in and out of the body is called respiration. Lung cancers form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The lungs' airways are called the bronchus, bronchioli, and alveoli. Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. They break the rules of cell growth. Cancer cells make many new cancer cells. They also do not die when they should. This overgrowth of cancer cells becomes a mass of tissue called a tumor. Cancer cells grow out of control. They can grow through the airway and into the lung tissue. They can grow through the lung wall and invade other body parts. Cancer cells can break away from a tumor and spread. They can enter the bloodstream or a fluid called lymph and spread to other places. This out-of-control cell growth can harm the body. Cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Without enough normal cells, cancer cells can cause organs to stop working. Scientists have learned a great deal about cancer. As a result, today’s treatments work Small cell lung cancer cells appear small and blue when viewed with a microscope. better than treatments in the past. Also, many people with cancer have more than one treatment option. The two most common types of lung cancer are: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), further divided into: • Adenocarcinoma • Squamous cell carcinoma • Adenosquamous carcinoma • Large cell carcinoma • Sarcomatoid carcinoma Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), further divided into: • Small cell carcinoma • Combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinoma The names of the cancers refer to their appearance under a microscope. When viewed with a microscope, SCLCs appear small and blue. Sometimes lung tumors contain both small cell and non-small cell lung cancer cells. These are called combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinomas and are usually treated like small cell lung cancer. SCLC is much less common than NSCLC. It is the focus of this book. NCCN has a two-part book series on NSCLC, found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are the causes and risk factors? Smoking cigarettes is the main cause of SCLC. Almost everyone with SCLC smokes or has smoked. Many people with SCLC have regularly smoked more than a pack a day. Exposure to second-hand smoke also increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from combustible tobacco products. Although rare in Western countries, there are occasions where people with no smoking history develop this disease. There are other unknown causes of SCLC. Researchers are still learning why some people who smoke never get lung cancer and others who have never smoked do. A person’s chances of getting SCLC are higher in the following situations: Over 70 years of age Prior radiation therapy to the chest Exposure to cancer-causing chemicals (also known as carcinogens), such as radon and asbestos If you don’t smoke, don’t start. If you do smoke, quit. New lung tumors are less likely to develop after quitting smoking. Nicotine addiction is one of the hardest addictions to stop. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. There is help. Ask your health care providers about counseling and medicines to help you quit. What are the symptoms of SCLC? SCLC can cause many types of symptoms. The symptoms depend on where the lung tumor has grown to or spread. SCLC can prevent the lungs from getting the air they need. Some people also have symptoms from paraneoplastic syndromes, which are caused by an abnormal body response to lung cancer. Some symptoms caused by SCLC are listed in Guide SCLC is often found when it’s causing symptoms or routine blood tests are abnormal. Less often, it’s found in x-rays or CT scans before symptoms start. Unlike other lung cancers, it’s difficult to detect SCLC early because it grows more quickly. Airways of the lungs Air moves through your body in a series of airways. It travels down your throat and through the windpipe (trachea). The windpipe splits into 2 airways called bronchi. Inside the lung, each bronchus branches off into the parts of the lung, called lobes. The right lung has 3 lobes, and the left lung has 2 lobes. The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioli. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. Oxygen is transferred from air into the blood in the alveoli. Your primary care provider may be the first to suspect that you have lung cancer. You will need to see specialists to determine if you have cancer. Your assessment team may include the following board-certified experts: Thoracic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pulmonologist Thoracic surgeon Medical oncologist Radiation oncologist To confirm that you have cancer, you’ll need testing of your body tissue or fluid. Small samples will be removed from your body during a procedure called a biopsy.
