Cervical cancer basics The cervix Cervical changes Risk factors Types of cervical cancer Key points Cervical cancer is a common cancer of the female reproductive system. Most cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection. The use of Pap smears has resulted in much lower rates of cervical cancer in the United States. The cervix The cervix is the narrow, lower end of the uterus. The uterus is where a baby grows and develops before being born. During birth, the cervix opens (dilates) and thins (effaces) to allow the baby to move into the vagina. The vagina, or birth canal, is the muscular passage through which babies are born. An ovary and a fallopian tube are on each side of the upper uterus. The fallopian tubes connect to the top part of the uterus. The ovaries make eggs for sexual reproduction. They also make hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle. Eggs pass out of the ovary and travel through the attached fallopian tube into the uterus. The cervix, uterus, vagina, ovaries, and fallopian tubes are part of the female reproductive system. The female reproductive system The reproductive system is a group of organs that work together for the purpose of sexual reproduction. In addition to the uterus (and cervix), this system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and vagina. Most cervical cancers start in the thin layer of tissue that lines the outer part and inner parts of the cervix. The ectocervix is the outer part of the cervix. It appears rounded and extends into the vagina. The ectocervix can be seen during an examination of the vagina and cervix using a tool called a speculum. It is lined with cells called squamous cells. In the center of the ectocervix is a narrow opening called the external os. During menstruation, the external os opens slightly to allow blood to pass into the vagina. The endocervix (endocervical canal) is the inner part of the cervix that forms a canal between the vagina and the body of the uterus. The endocervix is lined with columnar (glandular) cells that make mucus. The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix. The area where the endocervix and ectocervix meet is called the squamo-columnar junction or the transformation zone. Most cervical cancers and pre-cancers start in the ectocervix portion of the transformation zone. The cervical stroma is the thick layer of muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the uterus (and cervix) and connects it to the pelvis. Although the cervix is part of the uterus, uterine cancer is diagnosed and treated differently than cervical cancer. This patient guide does not discuss treatment of uterine cancers, such as endometrial cancer and uterine sarcomas. Cervical changes Cervical cancer starts as areas of abnormal, microscopic cells on the surface of the cervix. These changes are known as cervical dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Mutations (changes) in the DNA of these cells cause them to become abnormal. If left untreated, cervical dysplasia may become cervical cancer. CIN is graded based on the depth of the abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix. The possible grades are 1, 2, or Cervical dysplasia becomes cancer when the abnormal cells invade the muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining (the cervical stroma). An area of dysplasia or cancer is also referred to as a lesion. Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) refers to mild dysplasia (CIN 1). High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) refers to moderate or severe dysplasia (CIN 2 and 3). HSIL is considered a pre-cancer. Cervical changes Cervical dysplasia refers to areas of abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix. Lowgrade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) refers to mild dysplasia (CIN 1). High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) refers to moderate or severe dysplasia (CIN 2 and 3). HSIL is considered a pre-cancer. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the risk of developing a disease. Some people with no known risk factors may develop cervical cancer, while others with risk factors may not. HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 and under. There are two other HPV vaccines available in other parts of the world. One protects against HPV-16 and HPV-18 only. The other targets these and two additional types. The vaccine works best in younger people (ideally under age 13) because they are less likely to have been exposed to HPV. And, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPVrelated cancer. Other risk factors Other risk factors for cervical cancer are listed below. Some of these lead to a higher risk because they either increase the risk of being exposed to HPV or they weaken the immune system, which can make it harder for the body to clear HPV infection. A history of smoking Having given birth more than once (called “high parity” or multiparity) Oral contraceptive (birth control) use Being sexually active at an early age A high number of sexual partners A history of sexually transmitted infection Certain autoimmune diseases A weakened immune system due to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS, for example Types of cervical cancer Most cervical cancers start in the ectocervix. The ectocervix is lined with squamous cells. Cancer that forms in squamous cells is called a squamous cell carcinoma. About 2 out of 10 cervical cancers form in the endocervical canal. The endocervix is lined with cells that make mucus. These cells are referred to as glandular, gland-like, secretory, or columnar cells. Cancers that form in glandular cells are called adenocarcinomas. Less commonly, the cancer may contain both squamous and adenocarcinoma cells. These cancers are referred to as adenosquamous carcinomas. They are sometimes called “mixed” tumors. Treatment for squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and adenosquamous carcinoma is the focus of Part The rarest and most aggressive type of cervical cancer is neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC). Treatment for small cell NECC is the focus of Part This patient guide does not discuss other types of cervical cancer such as glassy-cell carcinomas, sarcomas, or other tumor types Key points The cervix The cervix is the lower part of the uterus that connects to the vagina. The ectocervix is the outer part that extends into the vagina. The endocervix is the canal between the vagina and the body of the uterus. Most cervical cancers and pre-cancers start in the ectocervix portion of the transformation zone. Cervical changes Cervical cancer starts as areas of abnormal, microscopic cells on the surface of the cervix. These changes are known as cervical dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Risk factors The risk factor most strongly linked with cervical cancer is long-term infection with HPV, a common sexually transmitted infection. h A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States. Types of cervical cancer Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common type, followed by adenocarcinoma. Adenosquamous carcinomas are less common. Neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC) is a rare and aggressive type of cervical cancer. 2 Testing and staging Biopsy Health history and physical exam Blood tests Imaging Fertility and pregnancy Other testing and care Staging Cancer care plan Key points Your doctors will make a treatment plan just for you. First, they will need to gather information about the cancer and your general health. This chapter describes testing and other care needed to create your treatment plan. Biopsy Cervical biopsy and pathologic review A cervical biopsy involves removing small samples of tissue from the cervix. It is the most commonly used procedure to diagnose cervical cancer. Samples may be taken from the rounded, bottom part of the cervix (ectocervix) and/or from the endocervical canal. The removed tissue is examined by a specialized doctor called a pathologist. A pathologist is a doctor who specializes in evaluating cells and tissues to diagnose disease. The pathologist looks for abnormal areas, including areas of cancer or pre-cancer. The pathologist also determines the type of cervical cancer, when possible. Cone biopsy Cone biopsy can be both a test and a treatment. It may be used to gather more information about the extent of the cancer after a cervical biopsy. It is also a recommended treatment option for some early cervical cancers. Also known as cervical conization, cone biopsy involves removing a cone-shaped portion of the cervix. The cone-shaped sample includes tissue from both the ectocervix and the endocervical canal. All of the transformation zone—where the ectocervix and endocervix meet—is removed. Most cervical cancers start in this area. Most commonly, a technique called cold knife conization (CKC) is used. In this method a surgical scalpel is used to remove the tissue. In some cases loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) may be performed instead. In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue. After removing the cone-shaped sample of tissue, your doctor may use a spoon-shaped tool called a curette to scrape a sample of tissue from the cervical canal. This is called endocervical curettage. The tissue removed during a cone biopsy is examined under a microscope by a pathologist. Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers. Health history and physical exam To help plan treatment, expect your doctor to ask about your past and current health, including: Illnesses, diseases, and surgeries Medicines that you take (prescription or over-the-counter) Your lifestyle (your diet, activity level, whether you smoke or drink alcohol) Possible symptoms of cervical cancer, such as watery vaginal discharge Your doctor will also do a physical exam of your body, which may include: Checking your vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature) and overall appearance Feeling and/or listening to the organs in your abdomen, including your liver and stomach h A pelvic examination to check the size, position, and appearance of your cervix and uterus It is important to let your doctor know if you have trouble with pelvic exams due to pain, anxiety, or other reasons. Blood tests The following blood tests may be ordered as part of initial testing. They can provide helpful information about your general health and the health of your liver, kidneys, and other organs before treatment. A complete blood count (CBC) is a common test that measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a sample of blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells fight infection. Platelets help to control bleeding. A blood chemistry profile measures the levels of different chemicals in your blood. Chemicals in your blood are affected by your kidneys, bones, and other organs and tissues. Blood chemistry levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ is not working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. Liver function tests are often done along with a blood chemistry profile. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as remove toxins from the blood. Liver function tests measure enzymes that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. If you have not had a recent human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test, or have never been tested, your doctor may recommend it. If you have HIV, you are likely to be referred to an HIV specialist. Having HIV should not affect your cancer treatment. The treatment options described in this guide apply to both HIV-positive and HIV-negative patients. Imaging Imaging helps determine the extent of the cancer. The size and spread of the cancer is used to guide treatment. Computed tomography You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan of your chest, abdomen, and/or pelvis. A CT scan is a more detailed kind of x-ray. It takes many pictures of an area inside the body from different angles. A computer combines the pictures to make three-dimensional (3-D) images. During the scan, you will lie face up on a table that moves through a large tunnel-like machine. To see everything better, a substance called contrast may be injected into your vein and also mixed with a liquid you drink. Contrast makes the CT pictures clearer. The contrast may cause you to feel flushed or get hives. You will be able to hear and talk to the technician at all times. You may hear buzzing or clicking during the scan. PET/CT A CT scan may be combined with another imaging test called positron emission tomography (PET). PET uses small amounts of radioactive materials called radiotracers. About an hour before the scan, you will be injected with a sugar radiotracer. The radiotracer gives off a small amount of energy that can be seen by the imaging machine. Cancer appears brighter in the pictures because cancer cells use sugar more quickly than normal cells. In some cases, PET may be performed with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (described next) instead of CT. MRI An MRI makes pictures of areas inside the body without using radiation. An MRI can show the tissues of the uterus, cervix, and vagina in detail. Magnetic resonance imaging MRI uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to make pictures of areas inside the body. It is especially good at making clear pictures of areas of soft tissue. Unlike a CT scan or -ray, MRI does not use radiation. You may have an MRI of your pelvis. An MRI can show the tissues of the uterus, cervix, and vagina closely. An MRI may show whether the cancer has spread to tissues next to the cervix, such as the parametrium, vagina, bladder, or rectum. For those with small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC), MRI of the brain is also recommended as part of initial testing. Getting an MRI scan is similar to getting a CT scan. You will lie face-up on a table that moves through a large tunnel in the scanning machine. The scan may cause your body to feel a bit warm. Like a CT scan, a contrast agent will be used to make the pictures clearer. MRI scans take longer to complete than CT scans. The full exam can take an hour or more. Tell your doctor if you get nervous in tight spaces. Transvaginal ultrasound If you cannot have MRI of your pelvis, you may have an ultrasound instead. Ultrasound uses sound waves to make pictures of areas inside of the body. It is good at showing the size, shape, and location of the cervix. In a transvaginal ultrasound, a probe will be inserted into your vagina. This helps your doctor see the cervix and nearby areas more clearly. Transvaginal ultrasound Ultrasound uses sound waves to make pictures of the inside of the body. For a transvaginal ultrasound, a probe is inserted into the vagina. Ultrasounds are generally painless, but you may feel some discomfort when the probe is inserted. Fertility and pregnancy If you want the option of becoming pregnant in the future, talk to your care team about fertility-sparing treatment. It is typically only an option for small, early-stage cancers. Recommendations for fertility-sparing treatment are provided in Part 4: Treatment for common types. If fertility preservation is desired, talk to your doctor about seeing a reproductive endocrinologist. Reproductive endocrinologists are doctors that specialize in fertility. Although natural pregnancy will not be possible, options to discuss may include ovarian transposition, egg or embryo freezing, and consideration of possible surrogate pregnancy in the future. Ovarian transposition Cervical cancer treatment may involve external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation damages the ovaries and causes them to stop producing hormones needed for natural pregnancy. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical name for this procedure is oophoropexy. Ovarian transposition before starting EBRT may be an option if you are premenopausal and have the most common type of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma. Egg freezing Unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte preservation. Surrogacy If you have frozen embryos or frozen eggs (oocytes), you may consider using a surrogate. A surrogate (often a relative or friend) volunteers to have the embryos inserted into their uterus. They carry the pregnancy and give birth. For more information on fertility preservation, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Other testing and care Checking the bladder and bowel Your doctor may want to examine nearby organs, like the bladder and bowel, for signs of cancer. If these tests are needed, expect to receive general anesthesia. This means you will be fully sedated and unaware that the procedure is taking place. These are referred to as examinations under anesthesia (EUAs). Cystoscopy is a procedure to see inside the bladder and other organs of the urinary tract. It is performed using a hollow tool with a magnifying lens at one end, called a cystoscope. The cystoscope is inserted through the urethra and guided into the bladder. Proctoscopy is a procedure to see inside the anus and rectum. It is performed with a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and magnifying lens called a proctoscope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen during cystoscopy or proctoscopy, tissue samples will be removed and tested (biopsied). If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke or vape, it’s important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works. Smoking and vaping can also increase the risk of lung problems during and after chemotherapy. They also increase your chances of developing other cancers. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke, ask your care team about resources and programs that can help you quit. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Staging The results of imaging and the other testing just described are used to determine the stage (extent) of the cancer. Your treatment options will depend on the cancer stage. The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) system is used to stage cervical cancer. There are four main stages in the FIGO system: I (1), II (2), III (3), and IV (4). The stages are broken down into sub-stages that have letters and may also have a number. The following information is used to stage the cancer in the FIGO system: The size or extent/depth of the tumor Whether any lymph nodes have cancer Whether the cancer has spread to involve nearby organs such as the bladder or rectum Whether the cancer has spread to distant organs such as the liver, lungs, and/or bone (metastasized) The stages are explained and pictured on the following pages. In general, people with earlier cancer stages have better outcomes, but not always. Some people will do better than expected for their stage, and some will do worse. Stage 1A cervical cancer The cancer is 5 millimeters (mm) or smaller. 5 mm is about the size of a standard pencil eraser. Cancers 3 mm or smaller are stage 1ACancers between 3 and are stage 1A Stage 1B1 cervical cancer The cancer is larger than 5 mm but smaller than 2 cm. Stage 1B2 and 1B3 cervical cancer The cancer is only in the cervix. In stage 1B2, the cancer is between 2 and 4 cm. In stage 1B3, the cancer is larger than 4 cm. Stage IB2 Cervical Cancer Stage IB3 Cervical Cancer Stage 2 cervical cancer The cancer has grown beyond the cervix. If the cancer has grown into the upper vagina, the stage is 2A. Stage 2A1 cancers are 4 cm or smaller. Stage 2A2 cancers are larger than 4 cm. Stage 2B cancer has grown into the parametrium. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the cervix and uterus. Stages IIA1 and lIA2 Cervical Cancer Stage lIB Cervical Cancer Stage 3A cervical cancer The cancer has grown into the lower third of the vagina. Stage 3B cervical cancer The cancer has grown into the pelvic wall and/or has caused kidney swelling or dysfunction. Stage 3C cervical cancer There is cancer in lymph nodes near the cervix (pelvic lymph nodes) and/ or in lymph nodes in the abdomen, called the para-aortic lymph nodes. Stage 4A cervical cancer The cancer has spread to nearby organs, such as the bladder or rectum. Stage 4B cervical cancer The cancer is metastatic. It has spread to the liver, lungs, abdomen, bone, or other distant sites or lymph nodes. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for cervical cancer often involves a team of experts, including a gynecologic oncologist, a medical oncologist, and a radiation oncologist. A gynecologic oncologist is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for female reproductive cancers. A medical oncologist is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy. A radiation oncologist is an expert in the use of radiation therapy to treat cancer. Your primary care physician (PCP) and gynecologist can also be a part of your team. These health care providers can help you express your feelings about your care to the team. Treatment of other health problems may be improved if they are aware of and involved in your cancer care. In addition to doctors, you may receive care from nurses, social workers, and other health experts. Ask to have the names and contact information of your health care providers included in the treatment plan. Cancer treatment There isn't a treatment plan that is best for everyone. There is often more than one treatment option, including clinical trials. Clinical trials study the safety and effectiveness of investigational treatments. The treatment that you and your doctors agree on should be described in the treatment plan. All known side effects should also be noted. It is also important to note the goal of treatment and the chance of a good treatment outcome. Keep in mind that your treatment plan may change. Testing may provide new information. How well the treatment is working may change the plan. Or you may change your mind about treatment. Any of these changes may require a new treatment plan. Stress and symptom control Anxiety and depression are common in people with cancer. At your cancer center, cancer navigators, social workers, and others can help. Help may include support groups, talk therapy, exercising, spending time with loved ones, or medication. You may be unemployed or miss work during treatment. Or, you may have little or no health insurance. Talk to your treatment team about work, insurance, or money concerns. They will include information in the treatment plan to help you manage the costs of care. For more information, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Distress During Cancer Care at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app for more information. Supportive care Supportive care aims to relieve the symptoms of cancer or the side effects of cancer treatment. It can help relieve discomfort and improve quality of life. Supportive care may be given alone or with cancer treatment. Side effects Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on nausea and vomiting is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Cervical cancer is most often diagnosed by cervical biopsy. Samples of cervical tissue are removed and tested for dysplasia and cancer. A cone biopsy may be used to gather more information after a cervical biopsy or to treat early cervical cancer. It involves removing a cone-shaped portion of the cervix. Blood tests provide helpful information about your general health and the health of your liver, kidneys, and other organs before treatment. Imaging helps determine the extent of the cancer before treatment. Initial imaging may include CT, MRI, PET, and/or transvaginal ultrasound. h A cystoscopy and/or proctoscopy under anesthesia may be needed to look for signs of cancer in the bladder and bowel. Fertility-sparing treatment may be an option for cancer that is only in the cervix. The stage is a rating of the extent of the cancer before any treatment is given. It is used to determine your treatment options. The FIGO system is used to stage cervical cancer. Quitting smoking can lead to better cancer treatment outcomes. Help is available if you are ready to stop smoking. 3 Types of treatment Surgery External beam radiation therapy Chemoradiation Brachytherapy Systemic therapy Clinical trials Key points In this chapter, the main treatments for cervical cancer are described. Your treatment options will depend on the extent of the cancer and other factors. Surgery Surgery is often the main treatment for earlystage cervical cancer. The types of surgery that may be used are described below. Removing only a portion of the cervix may be an option for the earliest stage of cervical cancer. In most cases, however, the entire cervix must be removed. While this can sometimes be performed through the vagina, an abdominal incision (cut) is usually needed. When the surgery is performed through a traditional (big) incision through the abdomen, the approach is known as laparotomy. Minimally invasive (also called laparoscopic) surgery involves making only a few small cuts into your body. There is usually less pain and scarring compared to surgery that uses a larger cut through the abdomen. The time it takes to recover is also usually shorter. Cone biopsy Cone biopsy involves removing a cone-shaped section of the cervix that includes tissue from both the ectocervix and endocervix. It is a recommended treatment option for some small cervical cancers. See Part 2: Testing and staging for more information on cone biopsy. Trachelectomy Trachelectomy is surgery to remove the cervix. The upper part of the vagina and pelvic lymph nodes may also be removed. Trachelectomy is a fertility-sparing surgery. The uterus and ovaries are left intact, allowing for the possibility of natural pregnancy in the future. In a simple trachelectomy, only the cervix is removed. In a radical trachelectomy, about 2 centimeters (less than a half inch) of vaginal tissue is removed in addition to the cervix. Both types can be performed either through the vagina or the abdomen. Hysterectomy Hysterectomy is surgery to remove the uterus (including the cervix). The types of hysterectomy that may be used to treat cervical cancer are described below. An extrafascial (simple) hysterectomy removes only the uterus (including the cervix). Extrafascial hysterectomy can be performed through the vagina, through the abdomen, or using a minimally invasive approach. This type is most commonly used for stage IA1 cancer. A modified radical hysterectomy removes the uterus (including the cervix), a portion of the connective tissue that holds the cervix in place, and about a half inch or less of the vagina. Modified radical hysterectomy is performed through the abdomen. A radical hysterectomy removes the uterus (including the cervix), much of the connective tissue that holds the cervix in place, and the top quarter or third of the vagina. Radical hysterectomy is performed through the abdomen. There are other differences between these hysterectomy types. If surgery is planned, your surgeon will explain the procedure recommended for you in detail. Ovary preservation The ovaries may or may not be removed during hysterectomy. If you have not entered menopause, surgery that removes both ovaries will cause menopause. This is referred to as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. There are shortand long-term symptoms and risks of surgical menopause that can greatly affect quality of life. When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. Symptoms include hot flashes, sleeping problems, night sweats, weight gain, and changes in mood. Vaginal atrophy is another common symptom. Vaginal atrophy is a condition in which the lining of the vagina becomes thin, dry, and inflamed. Longterm risks of not having enough estrogen include cardiovascular disease and bone loss (osteoporosis). If hysterectomy is being considered, ask your doctor if keeping your ovaries is appropriate. Lymph node dissection Cancer cells can travel through blood and lymph. Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells. Lymph nodes are bean-shaped glands found throughout the body. They contain immune cells that help the body fight infection and disease. During surgery for cervical cancer, lymph nodes may be removed in order to be tested for cancer. This is called lymph node dissection or lymphadenectomy. In order to identify and remove the lymph node(s) most likely to contain cancer, a sentinel lymph node biopsy may be performed. This involves injecting a special dye or a radioactive substance into the cervix near the cancer. Lymph nodes containing the dye or substance can be seen using a special camera. These are the sentinel nodes. They are removed and tested for cancer. Testing the removed nodes helps determine the extent (spread) of the cancer. Removing lymph nodes can also help limit the spread of cancer cells through lymph. The closest lymph nodes to the cervix are the pelvic nodes. Cervical cancer generally spreads to these nodes first. Lymph nodes in the abdomen, called the para-aortic nodes, are also sometimes removed. Pre-treatment surgical staging If the cancer has spread beyond the cervix, a hysterectomy is not performed but pelvic and/ or para-aortic lymph nodes may be removed and tested before any treatment is given. Knowing whether pelvic or para-aortic nodes contain cancer can help guide treatment decisions for more advanced cancers. A minimally invasive approach is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is referred to as laparoscopic surgical staging. External beam radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy waves similar to x-rays to kill cancer cells. In external beam radiation therapy (EBRT), a large machine aims radiation at the cancer site. The radiation passes through skin and other tissue to reach the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. EBRT is given in small doses, called fractions. An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as the bowel, bladder, external genitalia, and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT used to treat metastatic cervical cancer. High doses of radiation are delivered to tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone using very precise beams. Treatment is typically delivered in 5 or fewer sessions. Side effects Common side effects during the 5 to 6 weeks of EBRT include fatigue, skin redness and irritation, diarrhea, nausea, and frequent or painful urination. Most of these side effects develop gradually. They increase during treatment and gradually decrease once treatment is over. When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the External beam radiation therapy A large machine aims radiation at the tumor, passing through skin and other tissue to reach it. radiation beam. This procedure may be an option if you are premenopausal and have the most common type of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma. Otherwise, your doctor may consider the use of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) after radiation therapy has completed. This approach used to be called hormone replacement therapy or HRT. Hormone therapy for menopause helps lessen some of the side effects of radiation-induced menopause. See Part 6: Survivorship for more information. Radiation therapy for cervical cancer can also have long-term and serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. What to expect A planning session, called simulation, is needed before EBRT begins. You will first be placed in the treatment position. You will be asked to lie on your back and stay very still. You may get fitted for a prop to help you stay still during the radiation sessions. Pictures of the cancer site(s) will be obtained with a CT scan. Using the CT images and sophisticated computer software, your radiation oncologist will make a treatment plan. The plan will specify the radiation dose(s) and the number of sessions you will need. There will be several days between the time of simulation and the beginning of your treatment sessions. This allows sufficient time for careful treatment planning, dose calculation, and quality assurance. During treatment, you will lie on a table as you did for simulation. Devices may be used to keep you from moving. This helps to target the tumor. Ink marks (tattoos) on your skin will help position your body accurately for daily treatments. The technician will be operating the machine from an adjacent room. You will be able to see, hear, and speak with them at all times. You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes. Chemoradiation EBRT and chemotherapy are often used together to treat cervical cancer. They are given concurrently (during the same time period) in a treatment strategy called chemoradiation. Chemoradiation is recommended for most locally advanced cervical cancers. These cancers have grown beyond the cervix but have not spread to the liver, lungs, or bones. As part of chemoradiation, there are typically 5 EBRT treatment sessions per week for 5 to 6 weeks. Chemotherapy is typically given once weekly during this time. See page 37 for more information on chemotherapy. Brachytherapy Also known as internal radiation therapy, brachytherapy involves treatment with radioactive material placed inside the body. Brachytherapy allows a high dose of radiation to be targeted at the tumor while limiting the amount delivered to surrounding normal tissue. During brachytherapy, instruments are placed into the cervix, uterus, and vagina. A radioactive material then travels into the instruments that have been placed in the body. This method is known as intracavitary brachytherapy. Sometimes, additional instruments (catheters, or thin hollow tubes) are placed in the tumor itself or in tissues next to the tumor (interstitial brachytherapy). For the treatment of cervical cancer, intracavitary brachytherapy is most often used. Interstitial brachytherapy is a specialized technique that is used for more advanced cancers that involve the parametrium. It is best performed at cancer centers with experience in this method. Brachytherapy for cervical cancer may be given in short bursts, called high dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy, or in long bursts, called low dose-rate (LDR) brachytherapy. Most centers currently use HDR brachytherapy. Treatment is typically given in 3 to 5 sessions over 2 weeks. If you have not had a hysterectomy, a device called an applicator is inserted into the uterus through the vagina. A “tandem and ring” applicator is commonly used for HDR brachytherapy. The tandem is a long, thin tube that extends into the uterus. The ring is a hollow circle that stays in the vagina, pressed against the cervix. A tandem and ovoid applicator uses hollow, rounded capsules instead of a ring. General anesthesia or deep sedation is often required, especially for the first applicator placement. The applicator is placed to align with the tissue targeted for treatment. Often, an imaging technique (MRI or CT) is used to guide placement of the applicator. These images are used to design the brachytherapy treatment plan. The applicator is connected to a brachytherapy machine. A radiation source travels from the machine through the hollow tubes and into the applicator. Treatment takes about 10 minutes. Sometimes brachytherapy is given as treatments over a couple days. In this case, the instruments are placed and left in the body until all the treatments have been given (1 to 2 days). You will need to remain in bed until treatment is complete so that the instruments don’t move. Brachytherapy is typically started in the final week or right after completing EBRT. Shrinking the tumor with EBRT first allows for better placement of the brachytherapy applicators. Treatment with both types of radiation therapy can be completed within 7 to 8 weeks. Side effects The side effects of brachytherapy are similar to those of EBRT and include: h Skin irritation near treatment area Tiredness (fatigue) Soreness in your pelvic area Difficulty urinating or painful urination Softer bowel movements or diarrhea Increased vaginal discharge Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with substances that travel in the bloodstream, reaching cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy are types of systemic therapy. Most systemic therapies are given intravenously. This means they are slowly infused into your bloodstream through a vein. Infusions are often given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Chemotherapy Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most commonly used systemic therapy for cervical cancer. It stops the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. Cisplatin is generally preferred for platinumbased chemotherapy. If cisplatin is expected to be too harsh or cannot be given for other reasons, a different platinum drug called carboplatin may be used instead. As part of treatment with chemoradiation, cisplatin is typically given on a 7-day cycle (once weekly) for 5 to 6 weeks. When used for recurrent or metastatic cancer, infusions are typically given once every 3 weeks. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy Targeted therapy and immunotherapy are newer types of systemic therapy. Unlike chemotherapy, targeted therapy and immunotherapy are most effective at treating cancers with specific features, called biomarkers. They may be options for treating cervical cancer that returns or spreads after treatment with chemotherapy. Side effects of systemic therapy Systemic therapy can kill healthy cells in addition to cancer cells. The damage to healthy cells causes potentially harsh side effects. The side effects of chemotherapy depend on many factors, including the drug(s), the dose, and the person. In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, which are found in the intestines, mouth, and blood. As a result, common side effects include: Loss of appetite Nausea Vomiting Mouth sores Hair loss Fatigue Increased risk of infection Bleeding or bruising easily Nerve damage (neuropathy) Cisplatin can damage the kidneys. People whose kidneys do not work well may not be able to have cisplatin. An alternative chemotherapy drug may be used. Cisplatin can also cause ringing in the ears (tinnitus) or hearing problems or loss. Ask your treatment team for a list of common and rare side effects of each systemic therapy you are receiving. There are ways to prevent or alleviate some of these effects. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful. Phase 2 trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase 3 trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA. Phase 4 trials study the long-term safety and benefit of an FDA-approved treatment. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health. These requirements ensure that participants are alike in specific ways and that the trial is as safe as possible for the participants. Informed consent Clinical trials are managed by a group of experts called a research team. The research team will review the study with you in detail, including its purpose and the risks and benefits of joining. All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your doctor to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all of your treatment options. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance. You are responsible for copays and any costs for this care that are not covered by your insurance. Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact Key points Surgery Hysterectomy is surgery that removes the uterus, including the cervix. Some of the vagina and cervical connective tissue may also be removed. The ovaries may be removed or left in place during hysterectomy. Removing them causes surgical (premature) menopause. Trachelectomy is surgery that removes the cervix. It is a type of fertility-sparing surgery. The upper part of the vagina may also be removed. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays to kill cancer cells. In EBRT, a large machine aims radiation at the cancer site. Brachytherapy involves treatment with radioactive material placed inside the body. It delivers a high dose of radiation directly to the tumor. Systemic therapy Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most commonly used systemic therapy for cervical cancer. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy are most often used for recurrent and/or metastatic cervical cancer with specific biomarkers. Chemoradiation EBRT and platinum-based chemotherapy given concurrently (during the same time period) is a treatment strategy called chemoradiation. Clinical trials Clinical trials give people access to investigational treatments that may, in time, be approved by the FDA. 4 Treatment for common types Fertility-sparing treatment Early-stage cancer Locally advanced cancer Surveillance Recurrence Metastatic cancer Key points This chapter presents recommended treatment options for the most common types of cervical cancer. Surgery is usually recommended for earlystage cancers, while most locally advanced cancers are treated with chemoradiation. This section applies to the following types of cervical cancer: Squamous cell carcinoma Adenocarcinoma Adenosquamous carcinoma Treatment is based on the cancer stage. The stage describes how far the cancer has likely spread based on imaging and other testing. A risk factor that guides treatment for cervical cancer is lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI). LVSI means that there are tumor cells in the blood vessels or lymph vessels inside the tumor. Cancers with LVSI are more likely to spread to nearby lymph nodes. Nearby lymph nodes are more likely to be removed. Fertility-sparing treatment Surgical treatment for early-stage cervical cancer often involves surgery that removes the uterus (hysterectomy). Carrying a pregnancy is not possible after a hysterectomy. If the cancer has not spread beyond the cervix (stage 1), fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. If fertility-sparing treatment is being considered, ask your doctor about getting the opinion of a reproductive endocrinologist. Reproductive endocrinologists are doctors that specialize in fertility. A fertility-sparing approach is not appropriate for some uncommon types of cervical cancer. Stage 1A1 Cone biopsy is recommended for stage 1A1 cancers without known LVSI. If the results are good, no further treatment is needed. If the results suggest that the cancer was not completely removed, you may have another cone biopsy. Or, your doctor may recommend radical trachelectomy. For stage 1A1 cancers with LVSI, treatment with either cone biopsy or radical trachelectomy is recommended. Pelvic lymph node evaluation should also be performed. If trachelectomy is planned, see the next page for information on treatment after surgery. Stage 1A2 Cone biopsy is an option for some very-lowrisk stage 1A2 cancers. The tumor must be smaller than 2 centimeters, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is performed in addition to the cone biopsy. For stage 1A2 cancers with LVSI, treatment with either cone biopsy or radical trachelectomy is recommended. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is also performed. If trachelectomy is planned, see the next page for information on treatment after surgery. Stage 1B1 Cone biopsy is an option for some very-lowrisk stage 1B1 cancers. The tumor must be smaller than 2 cm, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is also performed. For stage 1B1 cancers that do not meet the criteria for cone biopsy, radical trachelectomy with pelvic lymph node evaluation is recommended. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may be removed in addition to pelvic lymph nodes. Stage 1B2 Fertility-sparing surgery is not performed often for stage 1B2 cancers. Because most research on fertility-sparing surgery applies to smaller tumors, abdominal surgery is generally preferred. Treatment after surgery If testing finds no cancer in tissue beyond the cervix or in lymph nodes removed during surgery, there are 2 options. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is recommended for cancers with risk factors. Observation is recommended for cancers without risk factors. Your doctor will consider the tumor size, whether there is LVSI, and other factors when determining if EBRT is a good choice for you. If EBRT is planned, platinum chemotherapy may be given during the same time period. This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Fertility-sparing treatment Fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired, for some stage 1 cancers. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. Early-stage cancer The treatment options in this section apply to: Cancers that are only in the cervix (stage 1) Cancers that have spread to the upper vagina (stage 2A) Surgery is recommended for most early-stage cancers. Treatment with EBRT alone or with chemoradiation may be recommended after surgery. If you cannot have surgery, radiation therapy is usually given instead. Treatment with both external (EBRT) and internal (brachytherapy) is recommended. Options for non–fertility-sparing treatment are provided next according to stage. EBRT or chemoradiation may be needed after surgery. Stage 1A1 Stage 1A1 cancers are typically diagnosed by cone biopsy. If cancer is found at the margins (edges) of the removed tissue and there is no LVSI, you may or may not have more treatment. If you want the option of becoming pregnant in the future, the cancer can often be observed without treatment. For those who do not want to preserve fertility, an extrafascial (simple) hysterectomy is usually recommended. Surveillance will begin. If cancer or pre-cancer is found in the cone biopsy margins and surgery is not possible, brachytherapy is recommended. EBRT may be given in addition to brachytherapy. If cancer or pre-cancer is found in the cone biopsy margins and surgery is possible, there are two possibilities. Your doctor may recommend another cone biopsy to confirm that the cancer is actually stage 1AIf pre-cancer is found at the margins, either an extrafascial (simple) hysterectomy or a modified radical hysterectomy is recommended. Lymph nodes in the pelvis may be removed during either type of hysterectomy. For stage 1A1 cancers with LVSI, modified radical hysterectomy with lymph node evaluation is recommended. Stage 1A2 and 1B1 Extrafascial hysterectomy with lymph node evaluation is recommended for low-risk stage 1B1 and 1A2 cancers. These cancers must meet the following criteria for extrafascial hysterectomy to be considered: No LVSI No cancer found in cone biopsy margins The tumor is any grade squamous cell carcinoma or a low-grade adenocarcinoma The tumor is 2 cm or smaller and not very deep h No signs of cancer spread in the body For 1A2 and 1B1 cancers that do not meet the above criteria, radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node evaluation is recommended. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may be removed in addition to pelvic lymph nodes. Stage 1B2 and 2A1 Radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node evaluation is recommended for these stages. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may be removed in addition to pelvic lymph nodes. Stage 1B3 and 2A2 Stage 1B3 cancers are larger than 4 cm (about the size of a walnut) but do not extend beyond the cervix. Stage 2A2 cancers are also larger than 4 cm and extend into the upper vagina. These cancers may be treated as earlystage (with surgery) or as locally advanced (with chemoradiation and brachytherapy). At this time, treatment with chemoradiation is preferred. See the next page for more information on this option. If surgery is planned, radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection is recommended. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may also be removed. Treatment after surgery After surgery, the pathologic (surgical) stage of the cancer is determined by examining the removed tissue. The following information applies to the stages below, as determined by surgery: Stage 1 Stage 2A If testing finds no cancer in tissue beyond the cervix or in lymph nodes removed during surgery, there are 2 options. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is recommended for cancers with risk factors. Observation is recommended for cancers without risk factors. Your doctor will consider the tumor size, whether there is LVSI, and other factors when determining if EBRT is a good choice for you. If EBRT is planned, platinum chemotherapy may be given during the same time period. This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Locally advanced cancer This section describes treatment options for cervical cancer that has grown beyond the cervix but has not spread to the liver, lungs, or bones. Cancers that are close to spreading beyond the cervix (stage 1B3) are also considered locally advanced. Locally advanced cancers are not metastatic. The information in this section applies to the following stages: Stage 1B3 and 2A2 Stage 2B Stage 3 Stage 4A Locally advanced cancers are more likely to have spread to lymph nodes than early-stage cancers. Knowing whether lymph nodes in the pelvis or abdomen contain cancer can help guide treatment with EBRT for these cancers. You may have extra imaging to look for lymph nodes with cancer. Another approach is to surgically remove and test lymph nodes before any treatment is given. A minimally invasive method is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is called surgical staging. If surgical staging is performed, the para-aortic lymph nodes are typically removed. Pelvic lymph nodes may or may not be removed. Treatment with all of the following is recommended for most locally advanced cervical cancers: Chemoradiation (EBRT and platinum chemotherapy) Brachytherapy If cancer is found in pelvic lymph nodes, EBRT will include the pelvis. If any para-aortic nodes are known or suspected to have cancer, EBRT will be given to a larger treatment area that includes these nodes as well. While treatment as described above is currently preferred for stage 1B3 and 2A2 cancers, surgery is sometimes recommended. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Surveillance After finishing treatment, you will have testing to look for early signs of possible recurrence. This is known as surveillance. The information that follows applies to surveillance for common types of cervical cancer and for small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC). Physical exams Physical exams performed by your oncologist are an important part of surveillance, especially in the first 5 years after treatment. At these follow-up visits, tell your doctor about any changes in your health. Such changes include new or worsening symptoms and other health conditions or concerns. The recommended time frames for these follow-up visits are as follows: Years 1 and 2: Every 3 to 6 months Years 3, 4, and 5: Every 6 to 12 months After year 5: Once a year or as agreed upon with your doctor Time frame ranges are used to allow for differences in individual risk of recurrence and in patient and provider preference. Those considered at higher risk of recurrence may benefit from more frequent exams than those with a lower risk. After the fifth year, visits are generally spaced out to once per year. Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence. Imaging Unlike physical exams, imaging is generally not needed at regular intervals for an extended time after treatment. Imaging is typically ordered if you have new or worsening symptoms, or if other findings suggest recurrence or spread. Follow-up imaging is described below according to the cancer stage. Stage 1 If you had radiation or chemoradiation after non–fertility-sparing treatment, or if the cancer is stage 1B3, you may have a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDGPET/CT) scan 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. The area from the neck to the midthigh is typically scanned. After fertility-sparing treatment, you may have an MRI of your pelvis (with contrast) 6 months after surgery and then yearly for 2 to 3 years. Stages 2, 3, and 4A Imaging is recommended 3 to 6 months after treatment for stage 2, 3, and 4A cervical cancers. An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned. Other imaging for these stages may include a pelvic MRI with contrast 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. Metastatic cancer For stage 4B or distant recurrences of cervical cancer, imaging is used mainly to learn how the cancer is responding to systemic therapy. Imaging may include CT, MRI, and/or PET/CT. Pap tests Depending on the type of surgery you have (if any), you may have annual Pap screening tests after treatment. Pap testing is helpful for finding new areas of abnormal and/or precancerous cells. It is not as good at detecting recurrent cervical cancer. Pap testing is also known as cervical or vaginal cytology. Blood tests If you have symptoms, or a physical exam was suspicious for recurrence, your doctor may order blood tests. In addition to a complete blood count (CBC), testing may measure blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine levels. These check your kidney function. Liver function tests may also be ordered. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. This includes keeping alert for symptoms of cancer recurrence. See Part 6: Survivorship for more information. Recurrence This section discusses cervical cancer that does not improve with treatment (persistent) or that returns after treatment (recurrent). If your doctor suspects recurrence based on your symptoms or a physical exam, you will have imaging tests to check. This could include CT, PET, and/or MRI. Surgery to look inside the body (exploratory surgery) may be helpful in some cases. The goal is to learn the extent of the cancer. This can help guide treatment decisions. Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Biomarkers are often mutations (changes) in particular genes. They can also be proteins that are made in response to the cancer. Biomarker testing is recommended for all recurrent cervical cancers. The results help determine whether treatment with certain targeted therapies is an option. The results can also be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials. Some doctors order biomarker testing early in the course of treatment. Many doctors wait and order it only if the cancer returns or spreads. Testing should be performed on tumor tissue removed during a biopsy or surgery when possible. Otherwise, a sample of blood may be tested instead. Other names for this testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, nextgeneration sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, and comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP). Testing for PD-L1 expression is recommended for everyone with recurrent, progressive, or metastatic cervical cancer. If the PD-L1 level exceeds a set cutoff point, the cancer is considered PD-L1-positive. If needed, treatment with certain targeted therapies or immunotherapies may be an option for PD-L1–positive tumors. The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for. Mismatch repair (MMR) Microsatellite instability (MSI) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) NTRK gene fusion (for those with a cervical sarcoma) HER2 RET gene fusion If cancer returns to the pelvis Cervical cancer that returns to the pelvis only is known as a local or regional recurrence. If the area has not been treated with radiation and the cancer can be surgically removed, this is generally preferred. After surgery, EBRT and systemic therapy are recommended. Brachytherapy may also be given. If the area has already been treated with radiation and it is no longer an option, possible treatment options are listed below. The best option(s) for you will depend on the specific location of the new cancer growth in the pelvis. Pelvic exenteration surgery Radical hysterectomy Brachytherapy Individualized EBRT and possibly systemic therapy Systemic therapy Resection of new cancer growth Radical hysterectomy and brachytherapy are typically only considered in carefully selected patients. Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis. The goal is to cure the cancer by removing all of the organs to which cancer has or may spread. All remaining organs of the female reproductive system are removed during pelvic exenteration. This includes the uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and vagina. Nearby organs in the pelvis including the bladder, rectum, and/or anus may also be removed. If the bladder and/or organs involved in bowel function are removed, a diversion is typically performed. Diversions are surgical procedures that divert (redirect) urine and/or stool to new openings through which they exit the body. Vaginal reconstruction It is often possible to reconstruct the vagina after pelvic exenteration. A surgeon can create an artificial vagina using muscle from another area of your body. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominus is often used for vaginal reconstruction. This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir. Sometimes the stoma can be made in the belly button, making it less noticeable. To drain urine, a catheter is inserted into the reservoir several times a day. A benefit to this type of urinary diversion is that an ostomy bag does not need to be worn on the outside of the body. If the rectum is removed If the rectum is removed, a permanent colostomy may be created. A colostomy connects the remaining colon to the outside of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through a stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. In some cases, the remaining colon can be connected to the remaining rectum or anus and a permanent colostomy may not be required. You may retain near-normal bowel function. If the anus is removed during the surgery, a permanent colostomy is always needed. If both the bowel and bladder are removed If both urinary and fecal diversion are needed, a double-barreled wet colostomy (DBWC) is sometimes used. In this technique, only one opening (stoma) on the surface of the abdomen is needed. Urine and stool are kept separate until they exit the body through the same stoma. Compared to having separate urinary and fecal diversions, DBWC has been found to have other benefits, such as fewer leaks. Metastatic cancer If left untreated, or if not diagnosed early, cervical cancer often spreads to the liver, lungs, and/or bone. Cervical cancer that has spread to these organs is metastatic. Cancer that had already metastasized when it was found is stage 4B. If cancer returns and metastasizes after treatment, it is known as a distant recurrence. The information in this section applies to both types of metastatic disease. Metastatic cervical cancer is very hard to cure. Treatment is usually with systemic therapy. The goal is to keep the cancer under control and prevent further spread. If the tumor has not already been tested for biomarkers, it may be tested now. Biomarker testing can help determine whether you may be eligible for certain targeted therapies or immunotherapies. It may be possible to remove or destroy the new cancer growth(s) using one or more of the treatments listed below. Resection (surgery) EBRT Ablative therapies Ablative therapies destroy cancerous lesions with little harm to nearby tissue. They are often delivered using a specially designed needle (a probe or electrode) placed directly into or next to the tumor. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT that may be used to treat tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone. Only a few treatment sessions are needed. If treatment with the local therapies listed above is complete, systemic therapy may follow. Systemic therapy Metastatic cervical cancer is usually treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. If you had prior treatment with cisplatin, it may not work as well again on its own. In this case, it is often given with 1 or 2 other medicines, as part of a combination regimen. A factor your doctor will consider when selecting a systemic therapy regimen to use first (as “first-line” therapy) is whether the cancer has the PD-L1 biomarker. At this time, preferred first-line regimens for PD-L1–positive cancers are listed below. Bevacizumab (Avastin) might be added to either regimen. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) cisplatin paclitaxel Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) carboplatin + paclitaxel The preferred first-line regimen for all other metastatic cervical cancers is: h Cisplatin paclitaxel bevacizumab Pembrolizumab is an immune checkpoint inhibitor (a type of immunotherapy). Bevacizumab is a type of targeted therapy called a biologic that is designed to work with chemotherapy. Other recommended first-line regimens include different combinations of cisplatin (or carboplatin), topotecan, paclitaxel, and/or bevacizumab. Second-line or beyond If you cannot have more platinum-based chemotherapy, there are other options. Treatment with pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is preferred for cancers with one of the following biomarkers: TMB-H PD-L1–positive MSI-H/dMMR For cancers with a biomarker other than those listed above, immunotherapy or targeted therapy may be an option. Biomarkers and their related systemic therapies are listed in Guide For cancers without any of the biomarkers in Guide 1, preferred options include: Tisotumab vedotin-tftv (Tivdak), and Cemiplimab (Libtayo). If immunotherapy is planned, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Supportive care Supportive care is available to everyone with metastatic cervical cancer, regardless of whether you are in active treatment. Supportive care refers to a range of care and resources often needed by patients with metastatic cancer. Hospice care, access to pain specialists, and emotional and spiritual support are all components of supportive care. Because metastatic cancer cannot be cured, the main goal of supportive care is to make you more comfortable and to help keep the cancer under control. Supportive care may also help you live longer and feel better overall. When used for advanced cancers, supportive care is often called palliative care. You may also consider enrolling in a clinical trial. Ask your treatment team if there is an open clinical trial that you can join. Advance care planning Talking with your doctor about your prognosis can help with treatment planning. If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made. There are many benefits to advance care planning, including: Knowing what to expect Making the most of your time Lowering the stress of caregivers Having your wishes followed Having a better quality of life
