About glioma What is a glioma? What causes a glioma? Are there types of gliomas? How are gliomas diagnosed? Can gliomas be cured? What’s next? Key points Being diagnosed with a brain tumor can be frightening and overwhelming. This book will help you make sense of all the information that’s out there. It will also describe your options for treatment. Gliomas can be challenging to treat, but treatment is improving. What is a glioma? A glioma is a type of tumor that grows in the brain. A tumor is an abnormal growth of cells. Gliomas develop from certain brain cells called glial cells. Glial cells support the function of nerve cells (neurons) in the central nervous system (the brain and the spinal cord). Many types of tumors can occur in the central nervous system. Only those that start as glial cells become gliomas. Gliomas are the most common type of malignant (cancerous) brain tumor in adults. Gliomas can happen at any age but occur more often in adults than in children. Gliomas start in the brain or sometimes the spinal cord. But they rarely spread to another area of the body. What makes gliomas so complicated is that they invade and blend into the normal parts of the brain. So gliomas can be very difficult to treat without harming the healthy parts of the brain. Normal cells vs. cancer cells Normal cells follow the body’s rules. Normal cells increase in number only when they’re needed, and they die when they’re old or damaged. Cancer cells don’t follow the rules. Cancer cells can multiply quickly and avoid dying. Cancer cells can crowd out normal cells and take their place. Eventually this damages the body and often results in symptoms. What causes a glioma? No one knows exactly what causes most brain tumors, including gliomas. What experts do know is that brain tumors often start with an abnormality (mutation) in certain cells. This abnormality causes these cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). This type of mutation happens on its own. It’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Gliomas occur in both children and adults. This book discusses gliomas only in adults. Are there types of gliomas? There are several types of glioma tumors. The 3 most common types are astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and glioblastomas. They’re made of different kinds of glial cells. Astrocytomas look like star-shaped glial cells called astrocytes. The main job of astrocytes is to maintain the chemical environment that allows communication between nerve cells. Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells. Glioblastomas come from precursor cells that develop into cells like astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Glioblastomas are the most destructive and dangerous type of glioma tumor. Besides tumor type, gliomas are also categorized by grade. The grade indicates how fast the tumor is likely to grow. A low-grade glioma usually grows slowly while a high-grade glioma often grows rapidly. Although it helps to put gliomas into categories, it’s important to note that each glioma has its own molecular characteristics and behavior. That also means that each person’s glioma is unique. So your progress and experience will be unique to you. Gliomas often occur in the upper part of the brain where they can disrupt important brain functions. Few gliomas in adults have distinct and welldefined edges like the one in this illustration. Most gliomas blend deeply into normal brain tissue and have vague borders. This makes them very difficult to remove entirely. When the tumor is removed, some tumor cells must be left behind to avoid damaging nearby brain tissue. How are gliomas diagnosed? A glioma is often found when it starts causing symptoms. A symptom is a problem or feeling that may be a sign of disease. Gliomas cause symptoms when they put pressure on the brain or invade brain tissue. Some people have many symptoms while others don’t have any. Common symptoms of gliomas include: Unusual or frequent headaches Seizures Changes in personality or mood Nausea and vomiting Difficulty speaking or swallowing Muscle weakness Difficulty with walking, balance, or coordination Symptoms provide clues that something is wrong. But they don’t provide enough information to identify a specific illness. Different tests, physical exams, and surgical procedures are required to diagnose a glioma. If these tests show that you have a glioma, your care team will discuss your treatment options with you. If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain tumors. Diagnosis vs. prognosis What’s the difference between your diagnosis and your prognosis? These two words sound alike but they’re very different. Diagnosis: The identification of an illness based on tests. The diagnosis names what illness you have. Prognosis: The likely course and outcome of a disease. The prognosis predicts how your disease will turn out. Can gliomas be cured? Most gliomas are not curable, but they are usually treatable. Treatment can slow down the tumor’s growth for a period of time, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for a glioma are surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. These are often combined with one another for more complete treatment. Another option to consider is participating in a clinical trial for a potential new treatment. Treatment may be able to stop the glioma from growing and keep it stabilized for a time. This may last for months or years. However, even with the best treatment, gliomas usually grow back eventually. So periodic follow-up visits and additional rounds of treatment are recommended. It’s true that gliomas are eventually fatal for most patients. Many people diagnosed with a glioma have a difficult road ahead. Still, there’s hope. New therapies designed to treat specific types of gliomas are currently being studied in clinical trials. The number of these trials has increased in recent years, offering more hope to people living with this disease. Also, be aware that survival statistics come from research done several (or many) years ago. Those statistics may not reflect the improvements offered by today’s diagnostic tests and treatments. What’s next? This chapter provided a brief introduction on gliomas. The next chapter explains the tests needed to diagnose and monitor this disease. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with tumors in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with a brain tumor can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can. Start with the online resources listed in the back of this book. Key points h Gliomas develop from brain cells called glial cells. Glial cells support the function of nerve cells in the brain and the spinal cord. Gliomas can disrupt the brain’s ability to function properly. Gliomas can be difficult to treat because they frequently invade and blend into the normal parts of the brain. What causes gliomas is unknown. What is known is that gliomas often start with an abnormality (mutation) that makes glial cells grow out of control. The 3 most common types of glioma tumors are astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and glioblastomas. h Several different tests and procedures are usually needed to diagnose a glioma. Gliomas can be treated but usually return at some point. 66 Don’t Google your diagnosis and assume that statistics define your life! Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different.” 2 Glioma testing Health and symptom Imaging Biopsy Lab testing Your tumor type What’s next? Key points Different tests are needed to find out whether you have a glioma and what type it is. Testing also suggests what kind of therapy is most appropriate for you. You’ll need a variety of tests to diagnose a brain tumor and to make a treatment plan. (If you’ve already had testing and received a glioma diagnosis, you can turn to Chapter 3 to read about your treatment options.) Testing begins with an examination of your general health and an evaluation of your symptoms. Bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Health and symptoms Your care team needs to have all of your health information. They’ll ask you about any health problems and treatments you’ve had. Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. Symptoms Each part of the brain has its own job to do. Different parts of the brain manage different parts of the body. Symptoms occur when an area of the brain doesn’t work properly. Symptoms are often related to the location of the tumor in the brain as well as the size of the tumor. Symptoms develop as the glioma grows against, or weaves itself into, a part of the brain. This growth can cause swelling (edema) in the brain tissue around the tumor. Sometimes a tumor blocks the flow of fluid (cerebrospinal fluid) in and around the brain. Some people with low-grade gliomas never have symptoms. Low-grade gliomas generally grow slowly and can develop for years before they’re diagnosed. High-grade gliomas can cause a range of symptoms. These gliomas can grow quickly, developing in months or weeks. However, symptoms can also be caused by medical problems other than tumors. So for the most accurate diagnosis, be sure to tell your provider and care team about any and all symptoms you’re having, even if the symptoms seem unrelated. Common symptoms include: Headaches – Headaches are very common and often the first symptom in people with a glioma. Headaches can be worse in the morning, wake you up in the middle of the night, and occur with nausea and vomiting. Seizures – Seizures are also frequent in people with brain tumors. Seizures are often an early sign of a glioma, especially in low-grade gliomas. Fatigue – Fatigue is another common symptom of a glioma. Fatigue can be debilitating, frequent, emotionally overwhelming, and not related to how much sleep you get or how much activity you do. However, physical activity or exercise can sometimes help. Nausea and vomiting – Nausea and vomiting can be caused by the tumor putting increased pressure on the brain. Problems with thinking and speech – Examples include confusion, memory loss, and speech difficulties. Weakness or problems moving – People with a brain tumor may have muscle weakness on one side of the body, or difficulty with walking or balance. Changes in personality or mood – Changes in behavior, mood, and personality can occur in people whose tumors are located in parts of the brain that control mood and personality. Other symptoms also sometimes occur. Gliomas can cause vision problems such as blurred vision, double vision, or loss of peripheral (side) vision. Sensory disturbances include numbness, tingling, or burning sensations often on one side of the body. And high-grade gliomas are linked to blood clots in the legs and the lungs, which can cause leg swelling, chest pain, and shortness of breath. If you have any of these symptoms, your provider may want to take a closer look. This is where imaging comes in, which is discussed on the next page. Areas of the brain and their functions PARIETAL LOBE intelligence language reading sensation sensory perception OCCIPITAL LOBE vision color perception Neurological exam A neurological exam involves some simple tests to check your alertness, thinking, balance, coordination, reflexes, strength, hearing, and senses of touch and smell. You may also have an eye exam to check the health of the nerves in the back of your eyes. Performance status Your team will want to know how well you can do ordinary day-to-day activities—like working, taking a walk, climbing stairs, cooking dinner, carrying laundry, or taking a bath or shower. This evaluation is called performance status. The more activities you can do, the better your performance status. Your care team uses this evaluation to get a sense of the level of treatment you may be able to handle and whether you may be eligible for a clinical trial. Imaging If you have signs or symptoms of a brain tumor, your care team will want to try to find it and see what it looks like. Imaging tests are used to make pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images can reveal a tumor’s location, size, and other features. MRI Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most useful imaging test for identifying a glioma. MRI scans are good at showing the soft tissues, including the brain, as well as other details that help plan surgery. 66 Fatigue is more than just being tired. It can be physical, cognitive, or emotional. It can be created from external sources, such as noise, or internal sources, such as medication, not eating properly, or not getting enough exercise.” MRI uses a magnetic field and radio waves to take pictures of the inside of the body. During an MRI, you’ll lie on a table that slides into the scanning machine. (An open MRI scanner may be an option at some health care centers.) It’s important to lie still during the test to get the best pictures. You may be given a padded head brace or other devices to help you stay motionless. The machine makes loud noises but you can wear earplugs and listen to music. You’ll have multiple MRI tests throughout diagnosis and treatment. MRI is also used after treatment to see how well the treatment worked. You’ll have more MRIs during followup to watch for any recurrence or new growth. CT If MRI is unavailable or not recommended for you, you might have a computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan instead. A CT scan uses x-rays to take many images of your body from different angles. A computer then combines the pictures to make a 3D image. After imaging After the MRI or CT scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist, an expert in analyzing images of the nervous system. The radiologist will convey the imaging results to your care team. This information helps your team plan what the next steps of your care should be. If your images seem to show a glioma, the next step may be a biopsy. Biopsy If imaging scans show something that may be a glioma, your care providers will usually want to take a sample and evaluate it. A surgical procedure that removes a small piece of tissue for testing is called a biopsy. Getting a biopsy of a tumor is the only way to get an accurate diagnosis of your condition. A biopsy also gives your care team clues on how to treat your tumor. A surgical procedure called a resection does double duty as both a biopsy and a treatment. In a resection, your neurosurgeon will attempt to remove the entire tumor or as much of the tumor as safely possible. Removing the tumor could relieve symptoms and help you live longer. Also, a large sample of the tumor can give the most complete pathology results. Sometimes a resection isn’t possible. This happens when the glioma is in a difficult place to reach or is located in a vital part of the brain. In these cases, your provider will schedule a standard biopsy. There are 2 types of standard biopsies for gliomas: stereotactic biopsy and open biopsy. Stereotactic biopsy This is a very precise procedure that’s often used when a brain tumor is in a hard-to-reach or vital area. It aims to remove only enough of the tumor to make a diagnosis. A stereotactic biopsy is done by a neurosurgeon in an operating room. First, you’ll be fitted with a frame or several tiny markers around your head to aid the surgery. Next, you’ll be given anesthesia to go to sleep. A small area of your hair will be trimmed down to the scalp. The neurosurgeon will then make a little opening in your skull and insert a thin, hollow needle into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. A computerized navigation system, connected to MRI or CT imaging, will allow the surgeon to target and remove the sample with a high degree of precision. After removal, the opening in your scalp will be closed with sutures. You may be able to go home the next day. Open biopsy Like a resection, an open biopsy is a surgical procedure that involves making a small opening in the skull (craniotomy). First, you’ll be given anesthesia that will let you sleep through the procedure. Your neurosurgeon will cut open a section of your scalp and then remove a piece of skull bone. Using small surgical knives and other special instruments, the neurosurgeon will carefully remove a piece or pieces of the tumor. The segment of skull bone will be replaced and the incision will be sewn up. Lab testing After either type of biopsy, the tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis. A specialist called a neuropathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope. Sometimes, the sample is taken straight to the neuropathologist while you’re still in the operating room. The neuropathologist will perform an analysis right away and send the results back to the neurosurgeon. The results will say whether the tumor is malignant (cancerous) or benign (not cancerous). The results may also include the preliminary diagnosis, including the type and grade of the glioma. Knowing the preliminary diagnosis during your surgery helps the neurosurgeon to decide how much of the tumor to remove. The neuropathologist will also do molecular (genetic) testing, which indicates the type and growth rate of your glioma and other specific features. All this information will help your treatment team figure out the best treatment plan for you. If your hospital or medical center doesn’t have a neuropathologist, you can ask to have your biopsy sent to one. Stereotactic biopsy A stereotactic biopsy is needed to diagnose a glioma tumor. In this procedure, a thin, hollow needle is inserted into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. The sample is sent to a lab to be tested for cancer cells. Your tumor type If molecular testing was performed on your biopsy sample, the pathology report should reveal your tumor type. It’s important to identify the exact type of tumor you have to predict the course of your disease and plan your treatment. There are 3 ways to classify a glioma: Histology – The first way to classify the tumor is by looking at it under a microscope. This is called histology. For instance, a glioma with cells that look like astrocytes is likely to be an astrocytoma. Grade – Another way to classify a tumor is by grade, which is a rating of how abnormal its cells are. The more abnormal its cells, the faster and farther the tumor is likely to grow. Biomarkers – A glioma is also identified by its biomarkers. A biomarker is a molecular characteristic such as a genetic mutation. Each type of glioma has its own biomarker or set of biomarkers. For example, an astrocytoma may have a mutation in the IDH gene. So it would be called an astrocytoma IDH-mutant. When these 3 classifications are put together, it provides a full description of the glioma. For example, an “astrocytoma IDH-mutant grade 2” names its cell type (astrocytoma), its biomarker (IDH-mutant), and its growth rate (grade 2). Let’s look at each of these classifications in turn. Histology Histology means evaluating the structure of cells or tissues under a microscope. A neuropathologist does a histologic analysis when inspecting tissue from a biopsy. The neuropathologist will examine the tumor cells to classify the disease. The neuropathologist’s report will state if the tumor started in the central nervous system or elsewhere. If the tumor is a glioma, the cell type will be noted in the report. The types of gliomas are named after the glial cells that they resemble. The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes. 66 Brain tumors are insidious because the symptom burden can feel like an attack on the very nature of the self, including personality changes, language and memory impairment, physical impairment, and poor prognosis.” Grade Another way that gliomas are classified is by grade. The grade indicates how quickly the glioma is likely to grow and spread. Tumors are graded from 1 to 4 based mostly on how much the tumor cells look like normal cells. Low-grade gliomas include grades 1 and High-grade gliomas include grades 3 and Grades are used to predict the outlook (prognosis) of the tumor and to plan treatment. Grade 1 tumors grow slowly and are usually benign. Many people with grade 1 gliomas can be treated with surgery alone. But if the tumor grows back, additional therapy may be given. Grade 1 gliomas are more common in children than in adults. Grade 2 tumor cells look somewhat abnormal. These tumors grow slowly and can invade normal tissue. They may not grow back for many years. But when they do, they usually come back as a highergrade glioma. Grade 3 tumor cells don’t look much like normal cells. They quickly increase in number and invade nearby tissue. All high-grade tumors (grades 3 and 4) require additional therapy—like radiation and chemotherapy—after surgery. Grade 4 tumor cells look very abnormal. These tumors grow and spread very quickly. Glioblastomas are the most common grade 4 gliomas. Biomarkers The neuropathologist also tests the tissue sample for specific biomarkers. Biomarker tests provide more details about the glioma tumor. A biomarker is something found in the body that’s a sign of a condition, disease, or abnormality. In cancer care, biomarker testing looks for changes in genes, proteins, and other markers. Many of these changes are mutations. A mutation is an abnormal change in your DNA—your body’s genetic instructions. A mutation can disrupt how some cells behave, which can cause diseases like cancer. Biomarker testing can improve the accuracy of your diagnosis as well as fine-tune your treatment options. If testing detects a certain mutation, you might be able to receive treatment that’s targeted more precisely to your glioma. Right now, only a few targeted treatments are available for very specific kinds of glioma. But researchers are working on hundreds of clinical trials to find more. The following biomarkers aren’t the only biomarkers of gliomas, but they’re the most commonly tested. Finding these biomarkers (or not finding them) can provide specific information about your glioma. See Guide 1 on the next page. Ask what biomarker testing is available for your glioma. Some hospitals and treatment centers aren’t able to provide a full range of biomarker tests. But you can request your tissue to be sent to another lab for further testing. What’s next? After you’ve been diagnosed and have gone through further testing, your treatment team will discuss your results with you. You’ll also talk about your options for treatment based on your test results. The next chapter discusses the different options for treating gliomas. 66 Ask as many questions as possible during appointments and bring a family member with you to take notes.” Guide 1 Biomarkers identify specific gliomas Each type of glioma is identified by the biomarkers it has and those it doesn’t have ().
