Lymphoma basics Lymphatic system Lymphocytes Follicular lymphoma How does FL develop? Types of FL Key points Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a slow-growing (indolent) nonHodgkin lymphoma (NHL). NHLs develop from B lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes and sometimes other tissues. Lymphatic system Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) begins in the lymphatic system. The lymphatic or lymph system is a major part of the body’s immune system. It is a germ- and cancer-fighting network of tissues and organs that includes the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, and lymphatic vessels. Lymphatic vessels are a network of thin tubes that carry lymphatic fluid (lymph) and white blood cells into all the tissues of the body. White blood cells, such as lymphocytes cells, help fight infection and other diseases. Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. As lymph travels throughout your body, it passes through hundreds of small beanshaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes make immune cells that help the body fight infection. They also filter the lymph fluid and remove foreign material such as bacteria and cancer cells. Lymphocytes Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer of lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell that helps fight and prevent infection. Lymphocytes are found in blood and lymph tissue, and every organ in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Germinal centers Follicular lymphoma (FL) starts in the temporary germinal centers (GCs) of lymph nodes. These germinal centers are short-lived structures that form in response to infection or inflammation. When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein that specifically targets infections or cancer cells and recruits other parts of the immune system. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, cancer, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. Follicular lymphoma starts in mature B cells. Follicular lymphoma Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is a slow-dividing, slow-growing B-cell lymphoma that typically forms tumors in lymph nodes. However, FL can form tumors in other parts of the body such as the bone marrow. This is called extranodal (outside of the lymph node) disease. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. How does FL develop? In lymph nodes, temporary germinal centers (GCs) form in response to an immune stressor such as infection or inflammation. This is normal. But, when cells within germinal centers grow without proper regulation, it can develop into FL. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade. The grade helps tell how your lymphoma should be treated. Two different organizations categorize FL based on grade. In the 2022 World Health Organization classification (WHO5), follicular lymphoma grades 1, 2, and 3A are termed classic FL (cFL). International Consensus classification (ICC) groups grades 1 and 2 as cFL. This book follows the ICC classification system. h FL grade 1 and 2 are treated as classic FL according to the ICC. h Grade 3A might be treated as classic FL or DLBCL depending on the cancer center and the types of cells found with testing. FL grade 3B (FL3B) called follicular large B cell lymphoma in the WHO5 is rare. It is treated as DLBCL. Types of FL The following types of FL are described in this book. Classic FL As mentioned on the previous page, classic FL (cFL) is grade 1 or Almost everyone with FL has a chromosome translocation or has excess levels of the BCL2 protein in their tumor. A chromosome translocation is the switching of part of one chromosome with another chromosome within the lymphoma cells. Uncommon FL When FL has uncommon pathologic (disease) features or is t(14;18)-negative, it might be called uncommon FL (uFL). It is treated as classic FL in this book. Pediatric-type FL Pediatric-type FL (PTFL) usually occurs in children but can also occur in adults. Usually, only one lymph node is enlarged in the head and neck region and there might be no symptoms. Transformed FL FL can transform into a more aggressive lymphoma called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). This means your slowgrowing FL has turned into a large-cell, fastgrowing lymphoma. Transformed FL can occur before, during, or after treatment. In DLBCL, tumors are commonly found in lymph nodes, spleen, liver, bone marrow, or other tissues and organs. Key points The lymphatic or lymph system is a network of tissues and organs that helps your body fight infections and disease. It is part of the immune system. h Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. h Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a slowgrowing (indolent) lymphoma that typically forms tumors in the lymph nodes. However, FL can be found in other parts of the body. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes form clusters (follicles) in the germinal centers of lymph nodes. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. 2 Testing for FL Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Performance status Blood tests Biopsy Immunophenotyping Testing for FL biomarker and genetic changes Imaging tests Heart tests Key points Accurate testing is essential to diagnose and treat follicular lymphoma (FL). This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Follicular lymphoma (FL) might be found because of swollen lymph nodes or an enlarged spleen. Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support. These can be different people for different tasks or change over time. Consider bringing someone with you to doctor visits if possible, or have someone on the phone or join you for telehealth visits. Don't hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too. Organize your medical documents, including insurance forms, medical records, and test results. Keep a list of contact information for your care team and update your primary care physician (PCP) regarding any changes. Include details about the specific type of cancer, treatment, and dates in your contact list. Set up a MyChart or health record account if it’s available, which can help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. In many places the MyChart or portal messages are not immediately seen by a nurse or physician, so ask your care team how best to communicate with them, especially in an emergency. For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you.
