Ovarian cancer basics The ovaries Types of ovarian cancer Cancer care plan Key points Most ovarian cancers are found in the surface layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. These cancers can also start in the fallopian tube, close to where the tube meets the ovary. This guide provides treatment recommendations for common and rare ovarian cancers. The ovaries The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. In addition to the 2 ovaries, this system includes the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. The ovaries make eggs needed for sexual reproduction. They also release hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle (periods). Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right. Each is surrounded by a long, thin tube called a fallopian tube. After an egg is pushed out by the ovary, it is caught by the fallopian tube and travels into the uterus. Here the fetus grows and develops during pregnancy. If the egg is not fertilized, this leads to a period. The uterus and at least 1 ovary and fallopian tube are needed for menstruation and pregnancy. The female reproductive system The female reproductive system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. Types of ovarian cancer Most ovarian cancers are found in the outer surface of the ovaries, called the epithelium. There are more than 5 types of epithelial ovarian cancer. The most common forms are: High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) High-grade endometrioid carcinoma Less common ovarian cancers Rare types of ovarian cancer are called less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs) or less common ovarian histologies (LCOHs). They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade. The grade is a rating of how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope. High-grade cancers grow and spread more quickly than low-grade cancers. The cancer grade is different than the stage. Stages are categories that describe where the cancer has or hasn't spread from the ovary. Surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing can provide a best guess of how far the cancer has spread before surgery. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for ovarian cancer takes a team of experts. When possible, a gynecologic oncologist should perform the initial surgery. This type of doctor is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for gynecologic cancers. Your care team may also include a medical oncologist. This doctor is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy and other medicines. You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others. Ask for the names and contact information of your care providers to be included in the treatment plan. Cancer treatment may be improved if your primary care provider is involved. They can help manage other health conditions that may be affected by your cancer treatment. Your treatment plan There isn't one treatment plan that is best for everyone. There is often more than one option, including clinical trials. Clinical trials study the safety and effectiveness of investigational treatments. The treatment that you and your care team agree on should be noted in the treatment plan, along with possible side effects. Keep in mind that your plan may change. Testing may provide new information. Your feelings about treatment may change. Side effects or other health conditions may prompt a change of plan. Key points The ovaries are a pair of grapesized organs in the pelvis. They make hormones and eggs for sexual reproduction. Most ovarian cancers affect the layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) and high-grade endometrioid carcinoma are the most common types of ovarian tumors. Less common ovarian cancers can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Treating ovarian cancer takes a team of experts. Gynecologic oncologists and medical oncologists often work together to plan your treatment. 2 Testing for ovarian cancer Abdominal and pelvic exam Imaging tests Biopsy Family history and genetic testing Nutritional and digestive tract health Blood tests Biomarker testing Key points This chapter describes the testing used to learn more about suspected ovarian cancer, including whether surgery is possible. Ovarian cancer can cause changes in the body that you can feel or notice. But you might not have symptoms until the tumor has grown large or the cancer has spread. Common symptoms include: Feeling bloated Heartburn and indigestion Pain or pressure in the pelvis or belly Trouble eating or feeling full fast Having to urinate often or urgently Pain during sex These symptoms can also be caused by hormonal changes or other common health problems. Ovarian cancer is more likely to be the cause if the symptoms: h Began less than 1 year ago, h Occur more than 12 days per month, and Are becoming more severe over time. If your provider suspects ovarian cancer based on your symptoms, you will have testing as described in this chapter. Testing helps determine the clinical (pre-treatment) stage. The clinical stage provides a best guess of how far the cancer has spread. It is a best guess because surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing also helps determine whether surgery first is the best treatment. Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors. Abdominal and pelvic exam Your provider will feel different areas of your belly. This is called an abdominal exam. They are checking to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Your doctor will also feel for signs of fluid buildup (ascites) in the belly area or around the ovaries. Your provider will also feel for abnormal changes in the size, shape, or position of your ovaries, cervix, and uterus. This is called a pelvic exam. A widening instrument, called a speculum, is used to view your vagina and cervix. A sample of cells may be removed for testing. This is known as a Pap test. It is used to detect cervical cancer or pre-cancer, not ovarian cancer. Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer. An exam of the rectum and vagina together may also be done to check for cancer in the space between the rectum and vagina. This is called a rectovaginal exam. Imaging tests Imaging tests can show the location, size, and shape of an ovarian tumor. They can also show if the cancer has spread beyond the ovaries. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your imaging tests. Ultrasound Ultrasound is often the first imaging test used to look for ovarian cancer. It uses sound waves to make pictures of areas inside of the body. Ultrasound is good at showing the size, shape, and location of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and nearby tissues. It can also show if there is a mass in the ovary and whether the mass is solid or filled with fluid. The 2 types of ultrasounds that may be used to look for ovarian cancer are described next. Both are done using a hand-held device called an ultrasound probe. Ultrasounds are generally painless, but you may feel some discomfort when the probe is inserted. For a transabdominal ultrasound, a gel will be spread on your abdomen and pelvis. The gel helps to make the pictures clearer. Your doctor will place the probe on your skin and guide it back and forth in the gel. For a transvaginal ultrasound, your doctor will insert the probe into your vagina. This may help the doctor see your ovaries more clearly. Transvaginal ultrasound Ultrasound uses sound waves to make pictures of the inside of the body. For a transvaginal ultrasound, a probe is inserted into the vagina. Ultrasounds are generally painless, but you may feel some discomfort when the probe is inserted. CT Imaging to look for ovarian cancer may include computed tomography (CT) scans of your abdomen, pelvis, and chest. CT scans are good at showing if the cancer has spread outside of the ovaries. They may also show if nearby lymph nodes are bigger than normal. This can be a sign that the cancer has spread. If you can have it, a substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. Before the scan you will be asked to drink a large glass of oral contrast. A contrast agent will also be injected into your vein. It may cause you to feel flushed or get hives. Rarely, allergic reactions can occur. Tell your team if you've had an allergic reaction to contrast in the past. A CT scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. While you lie on a table that moves through the tunnel, the scanner will rotate an x-ray beam around you to take pictures from many angles. MRI If the ultrasound images are unclear, you may have magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of your abdomen and pelvis. An MRI of your chest or liver may be used to look for signs of cancer spread. MRI doesn’t use radiation. It uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of areas inside the body. Getting an MRI scan is similar to getting a CT scan but takes longer. Like a CT scan, a contrast agent may be used to make the pictures clearer. You will lie on a table that moves through a large tunnel in the scanning machine. The machine is more enclosed than a CT scan. Tell your care team if you get nervous in enclosed spaces. You may be given a type of medicine called a sedative to help you relax. CT scan A CT scan is a more detailed kind of -ray. It takes a lot of pictures, or images, from different angles. A computer then combines the images to make 3-D pictures. PET CT or MRI are sometimes combined with positron emission tomography (PET). A PET scan shows how your cells are using a simple form of sugar, which can be helpful for identifying cancer. A sugar radiotracer is put into your body through a vein. The radiotracer puts out a small amount of energy that is detected by the machine that takes pictures. Cancer cells appear brighter because they use sugar faster than normal cells. PET is very good at showing small groups of cancer cells. This test may also be useful for showing if ovarian cancer has spread. Chest x-ray A chest -ray can show if cancer has spread to your lungs. It may be ordered with other tests when ovarian cancer is first suspected or found. It may also be used to check treatment results. A chest x-ray is fast and painless and uses small amounts of radiation. Diagnostic laparoscopy If the cancer is advanced, you may have a diagnostic laparoscopy before treatment. The goal is to learn how much cancer is in the abdomen. It helps your doctors to decide whether surgery can be the first treatment, or if chemotherapy is needed first. This minimally invasive procedure involves making a tiny cut in the abdomen. A thin tube with a light and a camera (laparoscope) is used to view the lining of the abdomen and the surface of organs in the abdomen. Tissue samples are taken and tested for cancer cells in a lab. Biopsy To diagnose ovarian cancer, a sample of tissue must be removed from your body for testing. This is called a biopsy. The biopsy is usually done during initial surgery to remove the cancer. But sometimes a biopsy is done to diagnose ovarian cancer before surgery or other planned treatment. This may be the case if the cancer has spread too much to be removed by surgery initially and chemotherapy is needed first. In such cases, a fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy, core biopsy, or paracentesis may be used. FNA uses a very thin needle to remove a small sample of tissue from the tumor. A core biopsy removes tissue samples with a hollow needle. For paracentesis, a long, thin needle is inserted through the skin of the belly to remove a sample of fluid. The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist for testing. A pathologist is a doctor who is an expert in testing cells to find disease. The pathologist views the samples with a microscope to look for cancer cells. If the cells are cancerous, the pathologist notes their appearance and other features. Prior surgery or biopsy The cancer may have been found during a surgery or biopsy performed by another doctor. In this case, your treatment team will need to review the prior surgery and testing results. A pathologist will examine the tumor tissue with a microscope to make sure it is ovarian cancer. Your doctors will also want to know if any cancer was left in your body after surgery. Family history and genetic testing Ovarian cancer usually occurs for unknown reasons. However, about 1 in 6 ovarian cancers is caused by mutations (changes) in genes that are passed down from parent to child. This is called hereditary ovarian cancer. It is most often caused by mutations in either breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) or breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2). Everyone has BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. When working properly, they are helpful and repair damaged cells. But mutations in these genes increase the risk of developing ovarian, breast, and some other cancers. Another cause of hereditary ovarian cancer is Lynch syndrome. Lynch syndrome is the most common cause of hereditary colon and uterine cancers but can also cause ovarian and other cancers. Ovarian cancer associated with a BRCA mutation or Lynch syndrome usually starts at a younger age than non-hereditary ovarian cancer. Using your age, health history, and family history, your doctor will assess how likely you are to have hereditary ovarian cancer. Genetic testing can tell if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. It is recommended for everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer. If initial treatment works well, BRCA status (whether you have a BRCA mutation) plays an important role in guiding decisions about maintenance therapy. Genetic testing may be done through your gynecology or oncology care team, or by a genetic counselor. The testing is done on normal tissue–either blood, saliva, or a cheek swab. Those with a positive genetic test or who have a strong cancer family history should see a health expert. This is typically a genetic counselor. A genetic counselor has special training to help patients understand changes in genes that are related to disease. There are many other hereditary syndromes besides BRCA and Lynch. Genetic testing typically tests for all of them. Commercial genetic tests currently available over the counter look for the most common gene mutations, but aren't comprehensive. In addition to testing for germline (inherited) BRCA mutations, the tumor itself should be tested for mutations in the BRCA and related genes. These are known as somatic or tumor mutations. Genetic testing is recommended for everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer. It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel. This involves inserting a scope into your anus and guiding it through the rectum and colon. To examine the upper GI tract, a scope is guided down the throat into the esophagus, stomach, and small bowel. This is called an upper endoscopy. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose ovarian cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. General health A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a sample of blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells fight infection. Platelets help to control bleeding. Your blood counts may be too low or too high because of cancer or other health problems. A blood chemistry profile measures the levels of different chemicals that are affected by your kidneys, bones, and other organs and tissues. Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. This test can also provide information about nutrient intake, such as protein levels. This can help guide treatment decisions. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as removing toxins from your blood. Liver function tests measure chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. Tumor markers A tumor marker is a substance found in body tissue or fluid that may be a sign of cancer. Along with other information, tumor markers can help diagnose ovarian cancer and monitor response to treatment. A cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) test is the most common tumor marker test for ovarian cancer. High levels of this protein in the blood may be a sign of ovarian or other cancers. A CA-125 test alone cannot diagnose ovarian cancer. Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment. Everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer should have the tumor tested for mutations in the BRCA genes, and in other similar genes important in DNA repair. This is different than genetic testing of the blood for inherited (germline) BRCA mutations. Mutations in the tumor itself are known as somatic or simply “tumor” mutations. BRCA mutations are a form of homologous recombination deficiency (HRD). This means that if you have a BRCA mutation, the cancer is also homologous recombination deficient or HRD positive. However, you can also have an HRD-positive tumor without a BRCA mutation. Other changes in the tumor’s DNA can make it homologous recombination deficient. The tumor's BRCA and HRD status are used to guide decisions about maintenance therapy after initial treatment. Other biomarkers The timing of testing for the biomarkers described next can vary. Some providers test for these (in addition to BRCA) early in the treatment process. Others may only test for BRCA and wait to see if therapies that require other biomarkers are needed. However, testing for these biomarkers is generally recommended for ovarian cancer that returns after treatment (recurrent). Testing is performed on removed tumor tissue. Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) HER2 expression Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) expression RET mutations NTRK gene fusion Key points The biopsy to diagnose ovarian cancer is usually done during initial surgery. If your team recommends chemotherapy before surgery, a biopsy will be done before starting chemotherapy Ultrasound is often the first imaging test performed for suspected ovarian cancer. Blood tests for suspected ovarian cancer include a CBC, chemistry profile, liver function tests, and tumor marker tests. Hereditary ovarian cancer is most often caused by a mutation in the BRCA genes. Families with a history of Lynch syndrome may also be at risk for ovarian and other cancers. Everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer should have genetic testing of the blood for inherited (germline) BRCA mutations. Biomarker testing looks for features of the cancer, such as mutations, that can help guide your treatment. Everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the BRCA genes and others important in DNA repair. 3 Treatment for common ovarian cancers Surgery If surgery first isn’t an option Staging Chemotherapy Maintenance therapy Surveillance Recurrence Clinical trials Key points The most common types of ovarian cancer are high-grade serous carcinoma and high-grade endometrioid carcinoma. These cancers are treated with surgery and chemotherapy. If treatment works well, maintenance therapy may be an option for more advanced cancers. Surgery Surgery is often the first treatment if you are willing and able to have it. Sometimes chemotherapy is given first. Surgery should be performed by a gynecologic oncologist. This is a surgeon who is an expert in cancers that start in the female reproductive organs. If your team recommends chemotherapy before surgery, see page The main goals of surgery are to: Remove all or as much of the cancer as possible, and Learn how far the cancer has spread. Hysterectomy with BSO The most common surgery for ovarian cancer is hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy (BSO). A hysterectomy is surgery to remove the uterus. When the cervix is removed in addition to the uterus, it is called a total or complete hysterectomy. A BSO removes both ovaries and both fallopian tubes. Pregnancy isn’t possible after a hysterectomy. Fertility-sparing surgery (described below) may be an option for some very early ovarian cancers that haven't spread beyond the ovaries. If cancer has spread outside the ovaries, your surgeon will attempt to remove as much of it as possible. This is called debulking or cytoreductive surgery. The extent of the surgery depends on how far the cancer has spread. It may involve removing all or part of nearby organs. Lymph nodes that look abnormal or that are larger than normal will also be removed when possible. Fertility-sparing surgery Pregnancy isn’t possible after the uterus is removed. This is difficult for those wishing to get pregnant in the future. Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place. Surgery to remove one ovary and its fallopian tube is called a unilateral salpingooophorectomy (USO). USO is only an option if the cancer is in 1 ovary and the cancer is appropriate for this procedure. After a USO, you may still be able to become pregnant naturally if you haven’t entered menopause. If the cancer is in both ovaries, a BSO (without hysterectomy) may be an option. While you can't become pregnant naturally after a BSO, pregnancy may be possible using assisted reproductive approaches. One such approach is in vitro fertilization (IVF). In IVF, eggs are fertilized with sperm in a lab to create embryos. The embryos are implanted into the uterus or frozen for future use. The eggs used for IVF may be yours (removed from your ovary before surgery) or donor eggs. Donor eggs are removed from women who have volunteered to go through hormone treatment to stimulate egg production in the ovaries. Surgical methods A laparotomy is the most common method for ovarian cancer surgery. A laparotomy is a long surgical cut in the abdomen. It is often an upand-down (vertical) cut from the top of the belly button down to the pelvic bone. This lets your doctor see the tumor and other organs and tissues in your abdomen and pelvis. This method is recommended most often when surgical staging (described next) or cytoreductive surgery is planned. Less often, a minimally invasive type of surgery called laparoscopy may be used. The surgery is performed through a few small cuts in the abdomen. Laparoscopy may be used in select cases, such as when cancer is only in the ovaries. This surgery should only be done by a gynecologic oncologist experienced in this method. Hysterectomy and BSO The most commonly used surgery for ovarian cancer removes the uterus, both ovaries, and both fallopian tubes. Surgical staging If it does not look like the cancer has spread, surgical staging should be performed. Surgical staging is the most accurate way to stage ovarian cancer. This involves taking samples during surgery from organs and tissues where ovarian cancer often spreads. The samples are tested for cancer cells. Your surgeon will also take samples from nearby tissues where it looks like cancer hasn’t spread. This is done to check for cancer cells that have spread outside the ovaries or pelvis and can only be seen with a microscope. These are called microscopic metastases. The omentum and sometimes nearby lymph nodes will be removed. The omentum is the fatty layer of tissue that covers organs in the belly (abdomen). Lymph nodes are groups of disease-fighting cells where cancer can also spread. If there is fluid buildup in the abdomen, the fluid will also be sampled. If there isn’t fluid buildup, your doctor may “rinse” the space inside your belly with a special liquid. This is called a peritoneal washing. Samples of the liquid will then be tested for cancer cells. Preparing for surgery Your treatment team will give you instructions on how to prepare for surgery. You may be asked to stop taking some medicines for a short time. You also should not eat or drink after midnight the night before the surgery. On the day of your surgery, you will be given medicine to put you into a deep sleep so you won’t feel pain. This is called general anesthesia. Surgery may take 3 or more hours to complete. More or less time may be needed depending on how much tissue is removed. After the surgery, expect to stay in the hospital for a few days or weeks to recover. You may feel some pain and tenderness in your belly and pelvis. It may last for a few days or weeks. You may be able to return to normal activities in a few weeks. The time it takes to fully recover varies from person to person. It also varies depending on the extent of the surgery. Premature menopause If you have not entered menopause, surgery that removes both ovaries will cause it. This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots. If surgery first isn’t an option Having surgery first may not be an option. This could be due to the size or location of the tumor, other health conditions, or your overall health. In this case, chemotherapy is given first to shrink the cancer. You will need a biopsy to confirm that the tumor is ovarian cancer before starting chemotherapy. At this time, preferred regimens include: h Paclitaxel and carboplatin Paclitaxel, carboplatin, bevacizumab, and maintenance bevacizumab While the above regimens are preferred, there are other recommended options for chemotherapy. Your team will take into account any medical conditions and your overall health. These regimens may change as new information becomes available. After a few cycles of chemotherapy (2 to 3 months), your doctor will check to see how well chemotherapy worked and if surgery is an option. The goal of surgery is to remove as much of the cancer as possible, as well as the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and uterus. Surgery performed after chemotherapy is called interval cytoreductive surgery (ICS). For stage 3 disease, hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) may be used during ICS. HIPEC is a technique in which chemotherapy is warmed and then circulated in the spaces between the organs of the abdomen during surgery. If cancer improves after several cycles of chemotherapy, surgery is usually recommended. If cancer stays the same, your doctor may recommend proceeding with surgery or continuing chemotherapy to see if there is improvement. After surgery, more chemotherapy is usually given. Maintenance therapy may follow once your cancer is in remission. Staging The information gained during surgery and surgical staging is used to determine the pathologic (post-surgery) stage. The pathologic stage provides the most accurate picture of how far the cancer has spread. It is used to guide treatment after surgery. A staging system is a standard way of describing the extent of cancer in the body. There are 2 staging systems for ovarian cancer. One was developed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), the other by the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO). They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often. In the FIGO system, the cancer stage is defined by 3 main areas of cancer growth: The extent of the first (primary) tumor The spread of cancer to nearby lymph nodes The spread of cancer to distant sites Ovarian cancer stages are numbered from 1 to Doctors write cancer stages as I, II, III, and IV. The stages are also divided into smaller groups, called substages. This helps to describe the extent of cancer in more detail. The FIGO stages of ovarian cancer are described on the following pages. Cancers of the same stage tend to have similar outcomes. Early-stage cancers tend to have better outcomes than more advanced cancers. Other factors not used for staging, such as your general health, are also important. Stage 1A Cancer is in one ovary. The outer sac (capsule) of the ovary is intact. There is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovary. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1C Cancer is in one or both ovaries and one or more of the following has also happened: • Stage 1C1 – The capsule of the ovary broke open during surgery. This is called surgical spill. • Stage 1C2 – The capsule of the ovary broke open before surgery, or there is cancer on the outer surface of the ovary or fallopian tube. • Stage 1C3 – Cancer cells are found in ascites or washings Stage 2A There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on the uterus and/or fallopian tubes. Stage 2B Cancer is in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on other organs or tissues in the pelvis, such as the bladder, colon, or rectum. Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes). • Stage 3A1 (i) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is (millimeters) or smaller. • Stage 3A1 (ii) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is larger than . Stage 3A2 Cancer has spread to the tissue lining the abdomen. The cancer is so small it can only be seen with a microscope. There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3B There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is smaller than a peanut (about 2 centimeters or smaller). There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3C There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is larger than 2 cm. There might be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. The cancer may have also spread to the outer surface of the liver or spleen. Stage 4 Cancer has spread to other parts of the body. Stage 4A – There are cancer cells in the fluid around the lungs. This is called a malignant pleural effusion. • Stage 4B – Cancer has spread to the inside of the liver or spleen, to distant lymph nodes, or to other organs outside the abdomen. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the use of medicine(s) to kill cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. When given before surgery, chemotherapy is called neoadjuvant therapy. When given after surgery, it is called primary or adjuvant chemotherapy. Platinum-based chemotherapy is recommended for ovarian cancer. These medicines contain the metal platinum. Carboplatin, cisplatin, and oxaliplatin are examples. One of these is often given with a different type of chemotherapy called a taxane. Paclitaxel and docetaxel are taxanes. Your options for chemotherapy will depend on your age and overall health. Your provider will also consider your risk for nerve damage, called peripheral neuropathy. This common side effect of paclitaxel causes pain, tingling, and numbness, often in the hands and feet. Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next treatment. The cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is recommended after surgery for most newly diagnosed stage 1 cancers. Observation may be an option for a stage 1A or 1B, low-grade tumor. Ask your doctor if this applies to your cancer. At this time, the preferred chemotherapy regimen is paclitaxel with carboplatin, given every 3 weeks. If you can't have this regimen, there are other recommended options. Six cycles of chemotherapy are recommended for high-grade serous tumors. Between 3 and 6 cycles are recommended for all other stage 1 tumors. The specific number of cycles needed depends on the tumor type and other factors. Stages 2, 3, and 4 For common tumor types, chemotherapy is recommended after surgery for all newly diagnosed stage 2, 3, and 4 ovarian cancers. At this time, the preferred chemotherapy regimen is paclitaxel with carboplatin, given every 3 weeks. Six cycles are given for stage 2, 3, and 4 cancers. If you can't have this regimen, there are other recommended options. A drug called bevacizumab (Avastin) may be added to your chemotherapy. It stops the growth of new blood vessels that feed the tumor. If chemotherapy works well, the next step may include maintenance therapy. See page 31 for more information. How chemotherapy is given Most chemotherapy for ovarian cancer is given intravenously. This means the medicine is put directly into your bloodstream through a vein. You may get a port to receive chemotherapy. This is a small, round disc that is usually placed under your skin in the upper chest. It is inserted during a minor surgery and stays in the body until treatment is complete. After treatment the port can be easily removed. Once the port is removed, the skin will heal. Chemotherapy medicine can also be slowly injected into the abdomen. This is called intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy. When given this way, higher doses of the drugs are delivered directly to the cancer cells in the belly area. IP chemotherapy is given through a thin tube called a catheter. The catheter is usually connected to a port placed inside the abdomen during surgery. Monitoring during chemotherapy Your doctor will monitor how well the chemotherapy is working and assess for side effects. Expect to have a physical exam every 1 to 3 cycles. A pelvic and rectovaginal exam may be done at the same time. Imaging and blood tests are ordered as needed. Testing for CA-125 or other tumor markers may be performed before each cycle of chemotherapy. Side effects of chemotherapy Common side effects of chemotherapy include: Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Mouth sores Hair loss Fatigue Increased risk of infection Bleeding or bruising easily Nerve damage (neuropathy) The side effects of chemotherapy depend on the specific medicines being used, the dose, and other factors. In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, Side effects Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on nausea and vomiting is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. which are found in the bowel, mouth, and blood. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy tends to cause more severe side effects than intravenous chemotherapy. This includes infections, kidney damage, pain in the belly, and nerve damage. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Ask your care team for a full list of common and rare side effects of the drugs you receive. Tell your care team about any medications or supplements you are taking. Some may interact with chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy Maintenance therapy is the use of systemic therapy after successful initial treatment for ovarian cancer. It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse. Maintenance therapy is an option for stage 2, 3, and 4 cancers that respond well to surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy. PARP inhibitors (PARPi) are a newer option for maintenance therapy after initial treatment. These oral targeted therapies work best in homologous recombination deficiency (HRD)- positive cancers, including those caused by a BRCA mutation. PARP inhibitors currently used for maintenance therapy after initial treatment of ovarian cancer include: Olaparib (Lynparza) Niraparib (Zejula) Rucaparib (Rubraca) The most common side effects of PARP inhibitors are similar to those caused by chemotherapy. They include fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and low blood cell counts. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Myelodysplastic syndrome is a cancer in which the bone marrow does not make enough healthy blood cells. There are abnormal cells in the blood and/or bone marrow. Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML. If chemotherapy included bevacizumab For HR deficient cancers and BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with both bevacizumab and olaparib (a PARP inhibitor) is a recommended option. If you can't have olaparib, niraparib is given instead. For BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is also an option. Maintenance therapy with bevacizumab alone is also an option for cancers not caused by a BRCA mutation, or whose BRCA status is unknown. If chemotherapy didn’t include bevacizumab If you have a BRCA mutation and chemotherapy didn't include bevacizumab, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is recommended. For some stage 2 cancers with a BRCA mutation, observation may be an option. If you don't have a BRCA mutation (or have not had a BRCA test), maintenance therapy with niraparib or rucaparib may be an option, especially if the cancer is HRD-positive. Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last? The length of maintenance therapy after initial treatment depends on the specific drug(s). Olaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. Olaparib bevacizumab together can be given for up to 15 months, with the olaparib continued for up to 2 years total. Niraparib alone can be given for up to 3 years. Rucaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. These recommendations can change with ongoing research. Keep in mind that any maintenance therapy will be stopped if the cancer grows or spreads. It will also be stopped if the side effects become too harsh or make it unsafe to continue. There isn’t much research on maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor after initial treatment for stage 2 ovarian cancer. If your cancer is stage 2 and you are eligible for maintenance therapy, talk to your provider about your options. Surveillance When there are no signs of cancer after treatment, expect to see your oncologist on a regular basis for physical and pelvic exams. First 2 years: Every 2 to 4 months Next 3 years: Every 3 to 6 months After 5 years: Once a year Your provider may order blood and imaging tests if you develop symptoms or if there are other reasons to suspect relapse. If your CA-125 level (or other tumor marker) was high originally, it may be checked on a regular basis after treatment. In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. See Chapter 5: Survivorship for more information. "I truly believe that you have to go through something life changing, to gain something life affirming." – Ovarian cancer survivor Recurrence The return of cancer after treatment is called a recurrence, or a relapse. Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy. For tumors with the folate receptor alpha (FRα) biomarker, the targeted therapy mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx (Elahere) is preferred for recurrence treatment. It is a type of antibody drug conjugate (ADC). Other options may include endocrine therapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. These options are described more next. Enrolling in a clinical trial is encouraged if you are eligible. Platinum-sensitive cancer If you enter complete remission after platinumbased chemotherapy and cancer returns more than 6 months later, the cancer is considered platinum-sensitive. This means that platinumbased chemotherapy drugs work well against the cancer. Because it worked well before, platinum chemotherapy is typically recommended for recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. This is especially true for the first recurrence. The targeted therapy bevacizumab may be added to chemotherapy. In certain circumstances, before starting recurrence treatment, your doctor may suggest surgery to remove all visible cancer. This is called secondary cytoreductive surgery. If recurrence treatment with platinumbased chemotherapy works well or very well, maintenance therapy is an option. If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy. A PARP inhibitor may also be an option for maintenance therapy, if you haven’t already been treated with one and there is a BRCA mutation. After successful chemotherapy for recurrent cancer, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor can be continued until the cancer grows or spreads, or until the side effects make it intolerable or unsafe to continue. When used after recurrence treatment, the safety of maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor for longer than 2 years is unknown. Hypersensitivity reactions With repeat use of carboplatin and/or cisplatin, you are at increased risk of a hypersensitivity (allergic) reaction. This can be life-threatening. If your treatment team hasn’t brought it up, below are some questions you can ask to learn about this risk. How likely is it that I will have an allergic reaction to chemotherapy? How will I know if I’m having an allergic reaction? What are the symptoms? Does the staff on hand know how to manage hypersensitivity reactions? Will the right medical equipment be available in case I have an allergic reaction? Biomarker-based treatment If the cancer has any of the biomarkers listed in Guide 3 below, targeted therapy or immunotherapy may be an option. For information on the side effects of immunotherapy, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app.
