Rectal cancer basics 5 The rectum 6 Polyps 6 Key points Rectal cancer is common and treatable. Many cancers that start in the rectum can be cured, especially when found and treated early. This guide describes treatment for adenocarcinoma, the most common type of rectal tumor. The rectum The rectum is the last several inches of the large intestine (bowel). After digested food becomes stool in the colon, it is held in the rectum until it exits the body through the anus. The rectal wall is made of layers of tissue. Cancer starts in the innermost layer that comes in contact with stool. If left untreated, cancer cells grow through the layers of the rectal wall, towards the inside of the pelvis. The cancer can then invade structures or organs outside of the rectum. Cancer cells can also break off from the rectal tumor. They can travel through lymph or blood to nearby lymph nodes or to distant organs like the liver or the lungs. The term colorectal cancer is used to describe cancers that form in either the colon or rectum. While these cancers are similar, their treatment is different. The focus of this guide is rectal cancer. For information on colon cancer treatment, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Colon Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. The rectum The rectum is about 5 inches (12 centimeters) long and forms the last part of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. Polyps Key points Polyps are non-cancerous growths that form on the inner lining of the colon and rectum. The most common type is called an adenoma. While it may take many years, adenomas can become invasive rectal cancer. Cancer that forms in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. This is the most common type of rectal cancer. Polyps that rarely turn into cancer include hyperplastic and inflammatory polyps. While most polyps do not become cancer, almost all rectal cancers start in a polyp. Removing polyps can prevent cancer before it starts. Most can be removed during a colonoscopy using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Polyps can also be tested to make sure that cancer hasn't already started to form. For more information on finding polyps early, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Colorectal Cancer Screening at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. The rectum is the last part of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. Polyps are non-cancerous growths that form on the inner lining of the colon and rectum. Most rectal cancers start in polyps called adenomas. These cancers are called adenocarcinomas. 2 Testing and treatment planning Mismatch repair testing Family health history Blood tests Imaging Fertility and family planning Key points This chapter discusses testing and other steps needed to create your treatment plan. Mismatch repair testing Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations (changes) in genes that fix damaged DNA, called mismatch repair (MMR) genes. This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome. FAP can cause hundreds to thousands of polyps to form in the colon and rectum. The polyps start as benign growths, but over time can become invasive rectal cancer. There are other inherited syndromes that are even more rare than Lynch syndrome and FAP. If your provider thinks you may have an inherited syndrome, they will refer you to a genetic counselor. This expert can talk with you and your family about getting tested for syndromes related to rectal cancer. If they determine that testing is appropriate, they can order a blood or saliva test to see if you have an inherited gene mutation. Blood tests General health tests A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. White blood cells help you fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots. A chemistry profile (also called a comprehensive metabolic panel), is a group of tests that provides information about how well your kidneys, liver, and other organs are working. CEA blood test Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a protein found in blood. People with colorectal cancer tend to have more than normal. Monitoring CEA can be helpful for some cancers that are only in the rectum. If the level rises, it could signal that the cancer has spread. If the level is high at diagnosis, it could suggest that the cancer has already spread. Monitoring CEA isn't helpful for everyone. Pregnant people and tobacco users may also have more CEA than average in their blood. 66 Write everything down and keep a binder or folder of information. If your loved one wakes up violently ill at midnight, it’s after hours and you need to know who to call. Be prepared before that happens, so you don’t have to scramble in an emergency. Have all phone numbers in one place (even if it’s on your phone)." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for colorectal cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic rectal cancer cells that may remain in the body after treatment. This may become helpful for predicting whether the cancer is likely to return. But, at this time, ctDNA testing is still being studied in clinical trials. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. This information helps your care team stage the cancer and plan treatment. A radiologist will interpret and convey the imaging results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for these tests. You may need to stop taking some medicines and stop eating and drinking for a few hours beforehand. Some imaging tests use contrast. Contrast is a substance that makes the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and/or mixed with a liquid to drink. Tell your doctor if you’ve had problems with contrast in the past. You may be given or advised to take a steroid and an antihistamine medication (like Benadryl) before the scan. It will lower the risk of an allergic reaction. MRI If surgery is needed or being considered, your doctor will order magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of your pelvis. MRI can show how deep into the rectal wall the cancer has grown and whether it has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Special techniques called a staging protocol are used to stage the cancer. Contrast may or may not be used. MRI doesn't use radiation and is safe for most people. People with certain heart monitors, pacemakers, or some types of surgical clips generally can't have MRI. Tell your team if you get nervous in small spaces. You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. In some cases, MRI may be used to look for cancer in the abdomen, especially the liver. This may be the case if you can't have the contrast agent used for a CT scan. MRI An MRI can show how deep into the rectal wall the cancer has grown and whether it has spread to nearby lymph nodes. A gel may be inserted into the rectum before MRI imaging. A light coil device or blanket will be placed on top of you. It sends and receives radio waves to record the images. The device covers your body from below your chest to the top of your legs. Straps may be used to help you stay in place. You may feel a bit warm during the scan. Endorectal ultrasound While a pelvic MRI is preferred for imaging rectal cancer, an endorectal ultrasound (EUS) is sometimes performed instead. Using sound waves, this test can also show the extent of cancer in the pelvis. A small probe is inserted into the rectum. Echoes form a picture that can be seen by your doctor on a screen. If needed, EUS may also be used to guide a biopsy of lymph nodes or other areas near the rectum. CT A computed tomography (CT) scan of your chest and abdomen is recommended as part of initial testing. CT can show if the cancer has spread to the liver, lungs, or other organs. Contrast will be used. During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine. A technician will be nearby. You will be able to hear and talk to them at all times. Endorectal ultrasound If you can't have a pelvic MRI (because you have a pacemaker, for example) or if MRI images were unhelpful, you may have an endorectal ultrasound instead. This test may also be ordered if your doctor knows the cancer has not grown far into the rectal wall. Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colorectal cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. Radiation therapy, for example, is used to treat many rectal cancers. Radiation damages the hormonemaking function of the ovaries and testicles. This can cause the inability to conceive a child. Damage to the ovaries is known as premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) or radiation-induced premature menopause. See the Survivorship chapter of this guide for more information on this side effect. If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will discuss any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about your fertility preservation options. Some are described next. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. Ovarian transposition Rectal cancer treatment may involve external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation damages the ovaries and causes them to stop producing hormones needed for natural pregnancy. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical name for this procedure is oophoropexy. Key points All rectal tumors should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). For cancers with this biomarker, testing for an inherited cancer syndrome called Lynch syndrome is recommended. Cancers that don't have this biomarker are called mismatch repair proficient (pMMR) or microsatellite stable (MSS). Everyone with rectal cancer should be asked about their family health history. MRI of the pelvis using a rectal cancer staging technique can show the extent of the cancer in the rectum and nearby lymph nodes. CT of the chest and abdomen can show if the cancer has spread to the liver, lungs, or other organs. If you want the option of having children in the future, or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will inform you of any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan and your options for preserving fertility. 66 When you’re up at 1 am, don’t “Dr. Google.” Go to reputable sites that have patient/caregiver information and resources. Recent, medically reviewed resources are more valuable than random Google results." 3 Treatment for non-metastatic cancer 5 Polyps with cancer Early rectal cancer Locally advanced cancer Recurrence Key points Rectal cancer often forms in polyps on the lining of the rectum, but can also form as lesions. This chapter explains treatment for rectal cancer that hasn't spread to areas far from the rectum. Polyps with cancer A polyp is an overgrowth of cells on the inner lining of the rectal wall. Adenomas are the most common type. While it may take many years, they can become invasive cancer. Cancer that forms in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. There are 2 main shapes of polyps. Pedunculated polyps are shaped like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. They have a stalk and round top. Sessile polyps are flatter and do not have a stalk. A polyp in which cancer has just started to grow is called a malignant (cancerous) polyp. Most polyps can be removed during a colonoscopy, using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Often, no further Polyps Polyps are growths on the lining of the bowel wall. Pedunculated polyps look like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. Sessile polyps are flatter and don't have a stalk. treatment is needed. In other cases, resection (surgical removal) of a larger piece of the rectum is needed. This depends on the following factors: The size and shape of the polyp The polypectomy results The results of testing the removed tissue Before deciding whether resection is needed after a polypectomy, your provider will review the results of testing with you and discuss your options. Sessile polyps are more likely to return after treatment. Imaging with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) or pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended for these polyps to help guide decisions about surgery. Early rectal cancer If cancer that formed in a polyp isn't found early enough to be removed by polypectomy, surgery is needed. Surgery is also needed for rectal cancer that forms as a lesion on the rectal wall. The true extent of the cancer can't be known until after surgery. But it can be estimated based on certain test results. This best guess is called the clinical or pre-surgery stage. It is used to determine your treatment options. Endoscopic submucosal dissection If testing finds that the tumor hasn’t grown beyond the second (muscle) layer of the rectal wall, it is a T1 tumor. Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is a recommended option for all T1 tumors. This minimally invasive procedure removes small rectal cancers in one piece, often curing them. Another name for this procedure is endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). First, an endoscope is used to locate the tumor in the rectal wall. A tool is guided through the scope to inject fluid between the tumor and the layer of muscle beneath it. This helps lift and separate the tumor, making it easier to cut off. Most people don’t need more treatment. Surveillance after ESD Checking for recurrence is recommended for at least 5 years after ESD. During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD. Imaging with endorectal ultrasound or pelvic MRI (with contrast) is recommended every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months through the fifth year. Transanal local excision For T1 tumors located at the end of the rectum, removing them through the anus may be an option. This is called transanal local excision. The surgeon cuts through all layers of the rectal wall to remove the cancer and some surrounding normal rectal tissue. Lymph nodes are not removed. Advanced techniques for removing tumors higher in the rectum include transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) and transanal minimally invasive surgery (TAMIS). If surgery confirms that the cancer is T1 and the tumor is considered low risk, no further treatment is needed. Surveillance will begin. Surveillance after transanal local excision Proctoscopies and imaging are recommended for 5 years after transanal local excision. These will take place every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months the next 3 years. For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended. A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery. If the results are good, your next colonoscopy will take place in 3 years. After that, a colonoscopy is recommended every 5 years. Other local excision results Sometimes more treatment is needed after local excision. Reasons you may need more treatment include: Testing of the removed tissues finds high risk features The tumor is larger than expected and has invaded the muscle layer (a T2 tumor) In either case, the preferred next treatment is transabdominal surgery. See the next page for more information on this method. A second option is chemotherapy combined with radiation. Doctors call this chemoradiation. This treatment approach is normally used for locally advanced cancers. See page 23 for more information. If chemoradiation works well, you might have chemotherapy next to kill any lingering cancer cells. Or, you and your doctor may agree to watch and wait. If there are signs of cancer after chemoradiation, transabdominal resection is recommended. Chemotherapy may follow. Transabdominal surgery Transabdominal surgery is recommended for tumors that have invaded the muscle layer of the rectal wall. In staging terms, these are T2 tumors. Abdominal surgery is also a recommended option for: smaller (T1) tumors, and some larger (T3) cancers that haven't spread to lymph nodes. This method involves cutting into the abdomen to reach and remove the rectal tumor, some surrounding healthy tissue, and nearby lymph nodes. A pathologist examines the removed tissue and determines the cancer stage. The type of transabdominal surgery performed depends on the location of the tumor and the extent of the cancer. At least 12 lymph nodes should be removed during all types of transabdominal surgery. Low anterior resection A low anterior resection (LAR) is a type of transabdominal surgery used for tumors in the mid to upper rectum. In addition to the rectal tumor, part or all of the last section of the colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis. This Low anterior resection (LAR) LAR is a type of abdominal surgery used to remove tumors in the mid to upper rectum. The rectal tumor and part or all of the sigmoid colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. allows for the possibility of having near-normal bowel movements. Your surgeon is likely to delay reattaching the bowel in order to let the surgical site heal. In this case, or if the colon can't be connected to the anus, a colostomy is made. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening (a stoma) on the surface of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through the stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. A colostomy may only be needed for a short time to allow the rectum to heal before being reconnected to the colon. But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum. These tumors may have grown into the anus or nearby pelvic floor muscle (levator ani). Abdominoperineal resection (APR) typically involves removing the anus, the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and other tissue. In some cases, the levator muscles are also removed. The outer ring of muscle in the anus may be spared. A permanent colostomy is always needed. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR is used for tumors in the lower rectum that may have grown into the anus or nearby muscle. It involves removing the rectum and anus and creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. After transabdominal surgery The tissue and lymph nodes removed during surgery are sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist assesses how far the cancer has grown within the rectal wall and whether any removed lymph nodes have cancer. Using this information, they assign the cancer a stage of I (1), II (2), or III (3). This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed. In stage 1, the tumor has grown into the second or third (muscle) layer of the rectal wall. No further treatment is needed. In stage 2, the tumor has grown through the rectal wall and possibly into nearby tissues or organs. In stage 3, cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. More treatment is almost always needed for stage 2 and 3 cancers. Next treatments may include chemoradiation, chemotherapy, or both. More information on chemotherapy is provided next. See page 24 for information on chemoradiation. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Chemotherapy regimens used to treat rectal cancer are listed in Guide Any regimen that has “OX” in the name includes oxaliplatin. Oxaliplatin can cause nerve damage (called neuropathy) to your fingers and toes. Symptoms include numbness, cramping, tingling, or pain in these areas. Any regimen that has “IRI” in the name contains irinotecan. Irinotecan tends to cause abdominal cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss.
