Hodgkin Lymphoma in Adults About the NCCN Guidelines for Patients ® Did you know that top cancer centers across the United States work together to improve cancer care? This alliance of leading cancer centers is called the National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . Cancer care is always changing. NCCN develops evidence-based cancer care recommendations used by health care providers worldwide. These frequently updated recommendations are the NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines®). The NCCN Guidelines for Patients plainly explain these expert recommendations for people with cancer and caregivers. These NCCN Guidelines for Patients are based on the NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines®) for Hodgkin Lymphoma, Version 2025 – January 30, Learn how the NCCN Guidelines for Patients are developed NCCN.org/patient-guidelines-process Supporters NCCN Guidelines for Patients are supported by funding from the NCCN Foundation® NCCN Foundation gratefully acknowledges the following corporate supporters for helping to make available these NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Pfizer Inc. NCCN independently adapts, updates, and hosts the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. Our corporate supporters do not participate in the development of the NCCN Guidelines for Patients and are not responsible for the content and recommendations contained therein. To make a gift or learn more, visit online or email Contents About Hodgkin lymphoma Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma Staging Treatment for classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) Refractory or relapsed CHL Treatment for NLPHL When treatment is over Other resources Words to know NCCN Contributors NCCN Cancer Centers Index 2025 National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Inc. All rights reserved. NCCN Guidelines for Patients and illustrations herein may not be reproduced in any form for any purpose without the express written permission of NCCN. No one, including doctors or patients, may use the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for any commercial purpose and may not claim, represent, or imply that the NCCN Guidelines for Patients that have been modified in any manner are derived from, based on, related to, or arise out of the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. The NCCN Guidelines are a work in progress that may be redefined as often as new significant data become available. NCCN makes no warranties of any kind whatsoever regarding its content, use, or application and disclaims any responsibility for its application or use in any way. NCCN Foundation seeks to support the millions of patients and their families affected by a cancer diagnosis by funding and distributing NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN Foundation is also committed to advancing cancer treatment by funding the nation’s promising doctors at the center of innovation in cancer research. For more details and the full library of patient and caregiver resources, visit NCCN.org/patients. About Hodgkin lymphoma What is lymphoma? What is the lymphatic system? Types of Hodgkin lymphoma 8 What can you do to get the best care? Hodgkin lymphoma is a highly curable cancer that usually starts in lymph nodes in the upper body. Most people are diagnosed between the ages of 15 to 30, or after age What is lymphoma? Lymphoma is cancer that begins when white blood cells called lymphocytes grow out of control. Lymphomas are described as either Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are a large and varied group of cancers. When viewed under a microscope, Hodgkin lymphoma cells look different than other lymphomas. The lymphocytes are abnormally large and may have more than one nucleus. These oversized lymphocytes are called ReedSternberg cells. The focus of this resource is Hodgkin lymphoma in adults. Information on Hodgkin lymphoma in children and adolescents is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What is the lymphatic system? The lymphatic system is part of your immune system. It helps your body fight infection and disease. The tissues and organs that make up the lymphatic system are described next. They are made mostly of lymphocytes. There are other types of white blood cells, but lymphocytes are the most important to understanding Hodgkin lymphoma. Lymph and lymphatic vessels There is a super-highway of ducts running through your body. These ducts are called lymphatic vessels. Much like how blood vessels transport blood, lymphatic vessels transport lymph. Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells (lymphocytes) throughout the body. It is also called lymphatic fluid. Lymph nodes While lymph travels throughout your body in lymphatic vessels, it passes through hundreds of small bean-shaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Lymph nodes can’t usually be seen or felt. The highest numbers of lymph nodes are found in the neck, groin, and armpits. Spleen The spleen is the largest organ of the lymphatic system. It is about 4 inches long and shaped like a fist. It makes lymphocytes and plays an important role in blood filtration and storage. Lymphatic system There are hundreds of small bean-shaped structures, called lymph nodes, throughout the human body. They catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Bone marrow Most bones have soft, spongy tissue in the center called bone marrow. This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. 2 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma Biopsy and lab testing Health history and physical exam Blood tests Imaging tests Heart and lung tests Other testing and care Key points Questions to ask This chapter explains how Hodgkin lymphoma is identified (diagnosed). Other testing and care you may have before treatment is described. Biopsy and lab testing The best way to diagnose Hodgkin lymphoma is to have 1 or more whole lymph nodes removed and tested. This is called an excisional lymph node biopsy. While an excisional biopsy is preferred, a core needle biopsy may be done in some cases. In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node. Guide 1 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma
