Lymphatic system Lymphocytes Primary cutaneous lymphomas Key points Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) starts in B cells, a type of white blood cell called a lymphocyte. These cells make antibodies to fight infections and are an important part of the lymphatic system. CBCL appears as a nodule under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Lymphatic system Lymphoma is the most common type of blood cancer. It affects the lymphatic system. The lymphatic or lymph system is a major part of the body’s immune system. It is a germfighting network of tissues and organs that includes the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, and lymphatic vessels. Lymphatic vessels are a network of thin tubes that carry lymphatic fluid (lymph) and white blood cells into all the tissues of the body. Lymph gives cells water and food. White blood cells, such as lymphocytes, help fight infection and disease. Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. As lymph travels throughout your body, it passes through hundreds of small beanshaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes make immune cells that help the body fight infection. They also filter the lymph fluid and remove foreign material such as bacteria and cancer cells. Lymphocytes Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer of lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell that helps fight and prevent infection. Lymphocytes are found in blood and lymph tissue, and every organ in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein that fights infection. h T lymphocytes or T cells help kill tumor cells and help control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing. This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions. 2 Testing for CBCL Test results General health tests Skin exam Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Immunophenotyping Testing for CBCL biomarker and genetic changes TNM scores Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat lymphomas of the skin. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Results from blood and tissue tests, imaging studies, and biopsy will determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results. Please wait to discuss the results with your doctor or health care team. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support. These can be different people for different tasks or change over time. Consider bringing someone with you to doctor visits if possible, or have someone on the phone or join you for telehealth visits. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too. Organize your medical documents, including insurance forms, medical records, and test results. Keep a list of contact information for your care team and update your primary care physician (PCP) regarding any changes. Include details about the specific type of cancer, treatment, and dates in your contact list. Set up a patient portal or health record account if it’s available, which can help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. In many places the MyChart or portal messages are not immediately seen by a nurse or physician, so ask your care team how best to communicate with them, especially in an emergency. For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin h Conduct a complete skin exam
